     Identifying elastoplastic parameters with Bayes’ theorem considering double
                          error sources and model uncertainty

                                 H. Rappela,b , L.A.A. Beexa,∗, L. Noelsb , S.P.A. Bordasa,c
      a Institute of Computational Engineering, Faculty of Science, Technology and Communication, University of Luxembourg,

                          Maison du Nombre, 6, Avenue de la Fonte, 4364, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
         b Computational & Multiscale Mechanics of Materials (CM3), Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering,

                     University of Liège, Quartier Polytech 1, Allée de la Découverte 9, B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
             c School of Engineering, Cardiff University, Queen’s Buildings, The Parade, Cardiff CF243AA, Wales, UK.




     Abstract
     We discuss Bayesian inference for the identification of elastoplastic material parameters. In addition to
     errors in the stress measurements, which are commonly considered, we furthermore consider errors in the
     strain measurements. Since a difference between the model and the experimental data may still be present
     if the data is not contaminated by noise, we also incorporate the possible error of the model itself. The
     three formulations to describe model uncertainty in this contribution are: (1) a random variable which is
     taken from a normal distribution with constant parameters, (2) a random variable which is taken from a
     normal distribution with an input-dependent mean, and (3) a Gaussian random process with a stationary
     covariance function. Our results show that incorporating model uncertainty often, but not always, improves
     the results. If the error in the strain is considered as well, the results improve even more.
     Keywords: Bayesian inference, Bayes’ theorem, stochastic identification, parameter identification,
     elastoplasticity, plasticity, model uncertainty


     1. Introduction

         A frequent approach for the identification of material parameters in solid mechanics is the least squares
     method (LSM; see [1]), in which the squared difference between the experimental output and the model
     response is minimised with respect to the material parameters. The result of such an approach is a de-
5    terministic estimate of the parameter values. A true insight in the certainty of each identified parameter
     value lacks however, as only a single residual forms the measure for the quality of the ensemble of identified
     values. Although some advanced formulations of LSM incorporate statistical information [2, 3], they as-
     sume that the measurement error is symmetrically distributed. For nonlinear models furthermore, linearised
     approximations are required to estimate the parameter distributions [4].
10       An alternative identification method is the Bayesian approach which allows accounting for modelling
     uncertainty and the statistical noises of the experimental devices [5]. The result of Bayesian inference (BI)
     is a probability density function (PDF) as a function of the parameters of interest. This PDF is called
     the posterior distribution in Bayesian terminology. Once the posterior distribution is obtained, statisti-
     cal summaries of the posterior such as mean, the value at which the posterior PDF is maximal (i.e. the
15   ‘maximum-a-posteriori-probability’ or ‘MAP’ point) and the covariance matrix need to be evaluated. With
     the exception of a few cases, numerical frameworks need to be employed for this. Markov chain Monte Carlo
     (MCMC) techniques [6–9] are probably the most frequently employed approaches for sampling PDFs.
         Bayesian inference (BI) was used in various previous studies to identify material parameters. The earliest
     work known to the authors is that of Isenberg [10], in which it was used to identify elastic parameters


       ∗ Corresponding author

        Email address: lars.beex@uni.lu, l.a.a.beex@gmail.com (L.A.A. Beex)


     Preprint submitted to Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics                                                        July 18, 2018
20   in 1979. In other works, this framework was employed to identify elastic material parameters based on
     dynamic responses [11–13]. BI was also used to identify the elastic constants of composite laminates in
     [14–17]. Spatially varying elastic parameters were furthermore identified using BI by Koutsourelakis [18].
     An introduction to identify Young’s moduli employing Bayesian inference can be found in [19].
         Elastoplastic parameters were also identified using BI. Parameters in linear elasticity-perfect plasticity
25   were identified by Most [20], while Bayesian updating via a polynomial chaos expansion for an elastoplastic
     system was considered by Rosić et al. [21]. In addition to elastoplastic material models, Bayesian updating
     procedures were employed to identify material parameters of hysteretic models [22, 23] and other nonlinear
     material models such as viscoelasticity and creep [24–26].
         In none of the aforementioned studies, the fact that the model itself may not be perfectly equipped to
30   capture the experimental measurements was considered. A framework that can deal with this was neverthe-
     less introduced by Kennedy and O’Hagan [27] in 2001, which is currently known as the ‘KOH’ framework
     and was employed in [18, 28–32]. Another issue that has received little attention in previous studies is that
     not only the output (e.g. the stress measurements) can be polluted by statistical noise, but the input as well
     (e.g. the strain measurements).
35       The aim of this study is to present a Bayesian identification framework for elastoplasticity that can
     treat uncertainties in both the output and the input, whilst also accounting for model uncertainty. The
     framework is constructed to deal with experimental data coming from monotonically increasing, uniaxial
     tensile tests. Output errors (the noise in the stress measurements) are commonly considered in identification
     approaches using BI, but input errors (i.e. the errors in the strains) seem to remain untreated in Bayesian
40   identification approaches. They may be worthwhile to include, because of the use of the clamp displacement
     as a measure to derive strains often overestimates the measured strains due to slip in the clamps. Even if
     digital image correlation (DIC) is employed to determine strains, errors may be included due to the finite
     accuracy of (1) the applied pixel patterns, (2) the finite resolution of the images, and (3) the algorithms of
     the DIC software, which come with different user-selected parameters (such as the size of facets) and finite
45   minimisation residuals.
         Bayesian updating including uncertainties in both output and input was yet employed in [33] for linear
     dynamic systems and was aimed at identifying modal parameters. The framework uses the assumption that
     the posterior can be approximated as a Gaussian distribution at the MAP point, which may be considered as
     a limitation. Studies in other fields can also be found that treat two error sources [34–39], but those studies
50   effectively employ linear regression.
         The KOH framework to address model uncertainty was furthermore not employed in any of the afore-
     mentioned studies. Model uncertainty can be incorporated in several ways in the KOH framework. The
     simplest way is to describe it with a constant variable, which is to be identified [30]. One can also use a
     random variable and treat the parameters of the random variable’s distribution as unknown parameters that
55   need to be identified as well (and hence, they appear in the posterior) [30, 40]. Instead of incorporating a
     deterministic variable, one can include a function of which the parameters are deterministic [41]. One can
     also include a random variable and assume its distribution’s parameters to be dependent on the input [40].
     Model uncertainty can also be represented by a Gaussian process [27, 32, 42]. More information on different
     ways to incorporate model uncertainty can be found in [40].
60       In this contribution, we investigate the effect of three model uncertainty formulations (i.e. a correction
     of the uniaxial material response in terms of the strain from ideal elasticity or elastoplasticity equations)
     on the parameter identification in elasticity and elastoplasticity: (1) a random variable which is assumed
     to come from a normal distribution with constant parameters, (2) a random variable which is assumed to
     come from a normal distribution with a mean that depends on the input (i.e. the strain) and (3) a Gaussian
65   process with a zero mean and a stationary covariance function. On top of that, we also investigate how the
     incorporation of the input error influences the results.
         The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses the expressions of the considered
     material models for uniaxial, monotonic tension. In Section 3, the main concepts of Bayesian frameworks
     for parameter identification are presented. In Section 4, the employed model uncertainty functions are
70   elaborated, including the corresponding likelihood functions. Section 5 presents the Bayesian approaches that



                                                           2
      incorporate both the measurements errors in the stresses and in the strains, as well as the model uncertainty.
      Indicative results are presented in Section 6. The measurement data in this section are artificially generated,
      so that we can compare the identified parameter distributions with the true values. Finally, this contribution
      is closed with conclusions (Section 7).
 75   Remark. Throughout this paper bold capitals and symbols denote matrices and bold lower case letters and
      symbols are vectors or columns.

      2. Material models

         In this section we present the stress-strain relations of the considered material models for monotonic
      uniaxial tensile tests. The material models presented in this section are: linear elasticity and linear elasticity
 80   with linear hardening.

      2.1. Linear elasticity
          In linear elasticity, the stress-strain relation is described fully linearly. This relation can be written as
      follows for uniaxial tension:

                                                        σ(, x) = E,                                               (1)
      where σ is the stress,  is the strain and x is the vector containing the material parameters, which here only
 85   consists of Young’s modulus E.

      2.2. Linear elasticity-linear hardening
          In a linear elastic-linear hardening material model, the elastic response is again described linearly in
      terms of the elastic strain. Plastic deformation occurs with linear work hardening when the stress reaches
      initial yield stress σy0 . In other words, the stress continues to increase (linearly) when plastic deformation
 90   takes place. The stress-strain relation for this model during monotonic, uniaxial tension reads:
                                                  (                                σy0
                                        σ(, x) =
                                                    E                   if  ≤ E ,                             (2)
                                                           HE        σ             σ
                                                    σy0 + H+E     − Ey0    if  > Ey0
                                                                                 T
      where H denotes the hardening modulus and hence, x = E            σy0   H        .

      3. Bayesian parameter identification

         In this section some concepts of Bayesian inference are explained. First, a rather standard Bayesian
      framework for parameter identification is presented. Subsequently, we present a Bayesian approach that
 95   incorporates a generalised model error term in the KOH framework. The parametrised formulations for the
      employed model errors and their corresponding likelihood functions are presented in Section 4 in more detail.

      3.1. Bayesian inference fundamentals
                                T
          Let y = y1 · · · ynm be a vector of nm measurements and let x be a vector of np parameters which
      are to be identified. Using the Bayes’ theorem, one can write:

                                                              π(x)π(y|x)
                                                   π(x|y) =              ,                                          (3)
                                                                 π(y)
100   where π(x) denotes the prior distribution (i.e. the PDF that represents one’s assumed prior knowledge about
      the parameters, e.g. the fact that the Young’s modulus cannot be smaller than zero), π(y|x) denotes the
      likelihood function (i.e. the PDF that measures the likelihood that measurements y are observed, given a
      set of parameter values x), π(x|y) denotes the posterior distribution (i.e. the PDF that describes the chance


                                                              3
      to obtain parameters x, given the measurements y) and π(y) is called the evidence. As the measured data
105   (y) are already known and hence, y are not variables in the posterior (π(x|y)), the evidence is a constant
      number (π(y) = C ∈ R+ ) which is independent of the parameters. Consequently, Eq. (3) behaves as follows:

                                                   π(x|y) ∝ π(x)π(y|x).                                             (4)
         Since the statistical quantities of interest, such as the mean, covariance and MAP point, are the same for
      Eq. (3) as for Eq. (4), it is sufficient to deal with Eq. (4). Next, we will discuss likelihood function π(y|x) in
      the presence of a general model error term.

110   3.2. Likelihood function
          In the KOH framework, the relation between a stress measurement and the model response is written as
      [40]:

                                                        y = σtrue + ωy ,                                            (5)
      with

                                                   σtrue = σ(, x) + d(),                                          (6)
      where ωy denotes the error in the stress measurement (output error), which is considered to be a realisation
115   from the PDF that we call here the stress noise distribution. Furthermore, d denotes the model uncertainty
      which can be assumed to be dependent on the input (i.e. strain  here). Assuming that we know the form
      of the noise distribution, the likelihood function reads:

                                         π(y|x, xd , xωy ) = πωy (y − σ(, x) − d()),                              (7)
      where xd denotes the parameter vector of the model uncertainty and xωy denotes the vector of parameters of
      the stress noise distribution. Often, the stress noise distribution is assumed to be a Gaussian distribution with
120   s2ωy variance and zero mean. Frequently, the parameters for both the model uncertainty (d) and the stress
      noise distribution (i.e. sωy for the Gaussian distribution with zero mean) are unknown and consequently, they
      must also be identified, i.e. they appear as variables in the posterior. As uniaxial tensile tests are generally
      performed in well-controlled tensile testers of which the parameters the noise distribution of the load cell
      can be rather straightforwardly calibrated, we assume that the stress noise distribution and its parameters
125   can be defined through a noise calibration process.
          Using Eqs. (4) and (7), the posterior distribution for a single measurement can be written as:

                                      π(x, xd |y) ∝ π(x)π(xd )πωy (y − σ(, x) − d()),                             (8)
      where π(x) denote π(xd ) are the prior PDFs for the model parameters and the model uncertainty parameters,
      respectively. Clearly, we have assumed here that the probabilities of the model parameters and of the model
      uncertainty are independent (π(x, xd ) = π(x)π(xd )). Furthermore, π(x, xd |y) denotes the joint PDF for x
130   and xd . For the case of nm independent measurements, the final likelihood function is a product of the
      likelihood functions for each output yi (coming with input i ):
                                                        nm
                                                        Y
                                        π(y|x, xd ) =         πωy (yi − σ(i , x) − d(i )).                        (9)
                                                        i=1

         Once the posterior is established, one can employ numerical sampling techniques to approximate the
      posterior’s statistical summaries (e.g. mean value, MAP point or covariance matrix). In this contribution
      the adaptive Metropolis algorithm [43] is employed to sample the posterior. The algorithm is elaborated in
135   Appendix A.




                                                                  4
      4. Model uncertainty

         In Section 3, Bayesian inference for a general model uncertainty was discussed. In this section, we present
      the likelihood functions for the three formulations of model uncertainty (d()), see Eq. (6). As mentioned
      before, these three formulations are: (1) a random variable coming from a normal distribution with a constant
140   mean and variance, (2) a random variable which comes from a normal distribution with a constant variance
      and a mean which is a polynomial function in terms of the input (the strain), and (3) a Gaussian random
      process with a stationary covariance function.
         Important to realise again is that the stress noise distribution is described by a normal distribution with
      zero mean and s2ωy variance, i.e. ωy ∼ N (0, s2ωy ). As mentioned before, we assume that sωy is known (see
145   Subsection 6.1).

      4.1. Random variable coming from a normal distribution with constant parameters
          In the first case, we describe the difference between the material model and the true response as reali-
      sations from a normal distribution with mean d and variance s2d , i.e. N (d, s2d ). d and s2d are unknown and
      must be identified by the Bayesian updating process. Prior knowledge about them can be incorporated in
150   the prior distribution. The likelihood function of for nm measurements, previously expressed in Eq. (9), can
      now be written as:

                                      π(y|x, xd ) = N (σ(, x) + d1nm , (s2ωy + s2d )Inm ),                   (10)
                                                                                                  T
      where σ(, x) denotes the vector of model responses for each input σ(1 , x) · · · σ(nm , x) , 1nm denotes
      the unit vector of size nm × 1, Inm denotes the identity matrix of size nm × nm and xd denotes the parameter
                                                        T
      vector for the model uncertainty i.e. xd = d sd . Eq. (10) clearly shows that this model uncertainty adds
155   a correction to the mean and increases the likelihood’s variance by s2d .

      4.2. Random variable coming from a normal distribution with an input dependent mean
         In the second case, we describe the difference between the model response and the true response as a
                                                                                                     PL input.
      random variable, that originates from a normal distribution of which the mean is a function of the
      We use polynomial functions to describe the relation between the mean and the input, d() = l=0 al l ,
                                                                              T
160   resulting in L+2 model uncertainty parameters: xd = a0 a1 · · · aL sd . Consequently, the likelihood
      function reads:

                                     π(y|x, xd ) = N (σ(, x) + d(), (s2ωy + s2d )Inm ),                   (11)
                                        T
      where d() = d(1 ) · · ·   d(nm ) . Note that increasing the polynomial order can lead to model noniden-
      tifiability [40].

      4.3. Gaussian process with a stationary covariance function
165      In the work of Kennedy and O’Hagan [27], model uncertainty was described by a Gaussian process [44],
      entailing that the error between the model and the true response is nonlocal in terms of the strain (i.e. the
      input). Following [27] and [42] describing a Gaussian process (GP) with a zero mean, we write:

                                                 d ∼ GP(0, λ2 c(·, ·|ψ)),                                      (12)
      where c is the squared exponential correlation function:
                                                              ( −  )2 
                                                                   i     j
                                          c(i , j |ψ) = exp −             ,                              (13)
                                                                     2ψ 2
                                                                                T
      where λ2 denotes the variance and ψ the length scale, yielding xd = λ ψ . i and j furthermore denote
170   two input values which may be the same (i, j ∈ {1, · · · , nm }). Note that the zero mean in the Gaussian


                                                            5
      process implies that no bias is included that increases the chance for d() to be positive or negative. The
      likelihood function now reads:

                                         π(y|x, xd ) = N (σ(, x), ΓGP + s2ωy Inm ),                            (14)
      where

                                            λ2 c(1 , 1 |ψ)                 λ2 c(1 , nm |ψ)
                                                                                              
                                                                 ···
                                    ΓGP =         ..            ..                   ..
                                                                                               .               (15)
                                                                                              
                                                    .                .                 .
                                               λ2 c(nm , 1 |ψ) · · ·    λ2 c(nm , nm |ψ)
         Eq. (15) clearly shows that the errors in the stress measurements are correlated in a GP. This implies that
175   the updating procedure is not performed by a multiplication operator as in Eq. (9). Instead, we consider y to
      be a realisation from a multivariate Gaussian distribution with non-zero off-diagonal components (unlike the
      cases in Subsections 4.1 and 4.2, in which the covariance matrix of the likelihood function only has non-zero
      components on its diagonal).


      5. Model uncertainty and noise in the strain

180       In the previous sections, we have assumed that the strain measurements are perfect (i.e. they are not
      polluted by noise). In this section, we reformulate the framework such that it can also treat errors in the
      strain. The errors in the stress and in the strain are assumed to be independent of each other, as the devices
      to measure the forces and strains or clamp displacements are independent of each other (e.g. if a load cell and
      digital image correlation are used). We first give the general likelihood function in case model uncertainty
185   and the noise in the strain is incorporated (besides the commonly incorporated noise in the stress). Then,
      we specify the likelihood functions for the three material descriptions for monotonically increasing uniaxial
      tension, if only the error in the noise is incorporated. Subsequently, we include model uncertainty for the
      two material descriptions.

      5.1. General likelihood function
190       In this subsection, a general likelihood function is presented that incorporates model uncertainty as well
      as the input error (and the output error obviously). As mentioned in Subsection 3.2, the experimental output
      in the KOH framework [27] can be written as follows:

                                                   y = σ(, x) + d() + ωy .                                    (16)
      We now assume that each strain measurement, ∗ , is also polluted by some statistical error, ω∗ , in an
      additive manner:

                                                            ∗ =  + ω∗ ,                                      (17)
195   where  is the true strain. Similar to the error in the stress measurements, we assume that the strain errors
      are realisations from a Gaussian distribution with a zero mean and variance s2ω∗ . Using Bayes’ theorem, we
      can now write:

                                                          π(y|x, xd , )π(|∗ )π(x)π(xd )π(∗ )
                                  π(x, xd , |y, ∗ ) =                                          ,              (18)
                                                                       π(y|∗ )π(∗ )
      or

                                     π(x, xd , |y, ∗ ) ∝ π(y|x, xd , )π(|∗ )π(x)π(xd ).                    (19)




                                                                  6
         The joint distribution of the material parameter vector x and model uncertainty parameter vector xd
200   reads:
                                                                 Z b
                                     π(x, xd |y, ∗ ) ∝                π(y|x, xd , )π(|∗ )d π(x)π(xd ),                     (20)
                                                                  0

      where b denotes the physical upper bound of the tensile tester (i.e. the ratio of the original length of
      the specimen and the maximum distance that the clamps can displace). Assuming again that the noise
      distributions for both the stress and strain measurements are known, Eq. (20) reads:
                                               Z b
                          π(x, xd |y, ∗ ) ∝           πωy (y − σ(, x) − d())πω∗ (∗ − )d π(x)π(xd ),                      (21)
                                                   0
      where πωy denotes the noise distribution for a stress measurement and πω∗ denotes the noise distribution
205   for a strain measurement. Note again that one may assume a form for both noise distributions and then
      treat the parameters of both distributions as unknowns, which are to be identified together with the material
      parameters and the model uncertainty parameters in the Bayesian updating procedure. However, we assume
      that these noise parameters can be identified using a separate calibration procedure (see Subsection 6.1).
          For nm measurements, the posterior reads:
                                                           Z b         Z b
                                 π(x, xd |y, ∗ ) ∝           ···            π(y|x, xd , )π(|∗ )dπ(x)π(xd ),                (22)
                                                            0           0
                                                           | {z          }
                                                                 nm
                               T                      T
      where y = y1 · · · ynm , ∗ = ∗1 · · · ∗nm . We furthermore use now π(|∗ ) = N (0, s2ω∗ Inm ). Inm
                                        
210

      denotes the identity matrix of size nm × nm . In case of nm independent measurements, the posterior reads:
                                             nm Z b
                                             Y
                        π(x, xd |y, ∗ ) ∝                 πωy (yi − σ(, x) − d())πω∗ (∗i − )d π(x)π(xd ).                (23)
                                             i=1       0

      The integrals in Eqs. (20)-(23) are either numerically approximated (e.g. using Monte Carlo integration [45])
      or analytically determined (see next subsection).

      5.2. The likelihood function considering input error
215   5.2.1. Linear elasticity
          In case of linear elasticity during monotonically increasing, uniaxial tension, Eq. (1) provides the model
      response, whilst the model uncertainty in Eq. (21) is ignored for now. Considering that ωy ∼ N (0, s2ωy ) and
      ω∗ ∼ N (0, s2ωy ), the likelihood function for a single measurement reads:
                                                        Z b
                                                                    (y − E)2   (∗ − )2 i
                                                                h                          
                                                  1
                                π(y|x, ∗ ) =               exp −             +              d.                (24)
                                              2πsωy sω∗ 0             2s2ωy      2s2ω∗
         By computing the integral in Eq. (24) analytically, it can be rewritten as follows:
                                       √             p − p 2   b − p              −p 
                              ∗          p3               2      1            1            1
                      π(y|x,  ) = √            exp −               erf √        − erf √      ,                                 (25)
                                   2 2πsωy sω∗            2p 3           2p3             2p3
220   where erf(·) is the error function [46] and p1 , p2 and p3 are formulated as follows:

                                 E ys2ω∗ + s2ωy ∗                     s2ωy (∗ )2 + s2ω∗ y 2             (sωy sω∗ )2
                          p1 =                             , p2 =                                 , p3 =                    .   (26)
                                   E 2 s2ω∗ + s2ωy                         E 2 s2ω∗ + s2ωy               E 2 s2ω∗ + s2ωy
      In case of nm measurements, π(y|x, ∗ ) is obtained using the product in Eq. (23).



                                                                               7
      5.2.2. Linear elasticity-linear hardening
                                                                                               T
          For linear elasticity-linear hardening, the unknown parameters are x = E σy0 H . Again substitut-
      ing Eq. (2) in Eq. (21) results in the following likelihood function for a single measurement:


                         1
                                       
                                           √          p − p2 h  σy0 − p              −p i
                                                        2                     1                1
        π(y|x, ∗ ) = √                        p3 exp −       1
                                                                 erf E√            − erf √          +
                     2 2πsωy sω∗                        2p3              2p3                2p3
                                                                                                         √
                                                                            p ∗         p∗            σy0 p∗    p∗
                                                           ∗ ∗    ∗2 h       p 1 a − √  2                 1
                                                                                                             − √2 ∗ i
                                                 1       p p −p                        p1∗           E       p1
                                               p ∗ exp − 1 3 ∗ 2       erf        √            − erf       √           , (27)
                                                  p1         2p1                    2                        2
225   where p1 , p2 and p3 are again given by Eq. (26) and p∗1 , p∗2 and p∗3 are expressed as follows:
                                              2                                                        2
                                       HE                                              HE          HE           σy0
                                       H+E               1                  (y − σy0 ) H+E +       H+E           E         ∗
                           p∗1 =                    +           ,   p∗2 =                                             +         ,
                                       s2ωy             s2ω∗                            s2σ                              s2ω∗
                                                                                                  2          2                  (28)
                                                                 HE y0              σ     HE              σy0
                                       (y − σy0 )2 + 2(y − σy0 ) H+E E +                  H+E              E                ∗ 2
                                                                                                                          ( )
                             p∗3 =                                                                                    +         .
                                                                             s2ωy                                         s2ω∗
          In the following subsection we discuss the formulations of the likelihood functions if model uncertainty
      is incorporated as well.

      5.3. The likelihood function considering input error and model uncertainty
          Adding input-dependent model uncertainty renders even the likelihood function of the linear elastic
230   material model impossible to analyse analytically. Consequently, we employ Monte Carlo integration to
      numerically approximate the integral of Eq. (20). π(y|x, xd , ) for all formulations of model uncertainty are
      given in Eqs. (10), (11) and (14).
          Note that in the case of the GP, the components of the measurement vector y are correlated. This
      means that updating, according to the multiplication operation in Eq. (23), is not possible. Instead, we
235   consider that measurement vector y is a realisation from a multivariant Gaussian distribution with non-zero
      off-diagonal components. In this case, Eq. (22) is used to construct the posterior.

      6. Results
          This section presents some examples of the Bayesian framework for the elastic and elastoplastic material
      models and uniaxial tensile data. The main points we aim to investigate are: (1) the influence of incorporating
240   the input error, (2) the influence of incorporating the three types of model uncertainty and (3) the influence
      of incorporating both the input error and model uncertainty. (Naturally, the output error is considered in
      all results as well.)
          For this purpose the measurements are generated numerically using responses which deviate from the
      constitutive responses. Next, Bayesian inference is used to identify the parameters of the material models
245   given in Section 2. To investigate the effect of incorporating the input error and model uncertainty on the
      identification results, posteriors and posterior predictions (see Appendix B) are furthermore presented for
      various cases and compared with the true parameter values and measurements. However, we first start with
      the calibration of the two measurement noises for uniaxial tensile tests. Note that all results are obtained
      using the adaptive Metropolis method for 5 × 104 samples, whilst burning the first 1.5 × 104 samples.

250   6.1. Noise calibration
          We start the noise calibration procedure by acquiring measurement data without the use of actual spec-
      imens. Stress-strain measurements as schematically presented in Fig. 1. They show that both noises can be
      represented as individual normal distributions with zero means and their own variances. In this contribution
      we have assumed sωy = 0.01 GPa and sω∗ = 5 × 10−5 .


                                                                               8
                                          σ




                                              πnoise (ω)

                                                                                     




      Figure 1: Schematic of the stress-strain measurements (red circles) of the ‘noise calibration experiments’, including an isoline
      if both noise distributions would be represented by a bivariate normal distribution (dashed).



255   6.2. Linear elasticity
      6.2.1. Input error
          In the first example, the added value of including the strain error is investigated for linear elasticity. The
      measurement data are generated using the following non-linear expression:
                                                                           E
                                                           σ(, a, E) =          ,                                               (29)
                                                                          1 + a
      where E = 210 GPa and a = 0.015. 20 measurements are generated using the same noise distributions as
260   identified in the previous subsection. Parameter a in Eq. (29) is chosen such that the difference between the
      non-linear expression used to generate the measurements and its linear approximation in the neighbourhood
      of  = 0 (i.e. σ = 210) is not too large (see Fig. 2(a)). We consider the following prior for the Young’s
      modulus:
                                                                   2
                                                                       
                                               exp − (E−E    prior )
                                                                         if E ≥ 0
                                                          2s2
                                       π(E) ∝               E prior                ,                           (30)
                                               0                        otherwise

      with E prior = 150 GPa and sE prior = 50 GPa.
265       Fig. 2(b) presents the marginal posterior PDF of the Young’s modulus for in case the output error alone
      is included (red curve) and for the case in which both the output and input errors are included (blue curve).
      Incorporating both error sources clearly results in a wider posterior. However, none of the resulting posteriors
      contains true value E = 210 GPa. The posterior mean and variance are given in Table 1.
          The posterior predictions are shown in Fig. 3. One can observe that incorporating both error sources
270   results in a wider envelope. This wider envelope includes more measurements, meaning that incorporating
      both error sources results in a more likely result.

      6.2.2. Input error and model uncertainty
          The effect of model uncertainty on the resulting posterior is studied now. First, we only include the case
      with output error but without input error. The prior used for the Young’s modulus is the same mentioned



                                                                     9
                                    (a)                                                               (b)

      Figure 2: Linear elasticity: (a) The experimental data generated for the first example, including the curve from which the data
      points are generated and its linearisation at  = 0. One can see that parameter a is chosen such that the difference between line
      210 and the true model is not large for small strains. (b) The marginal posterior PDF of the Young’s modulus if the stress
      error alone is incorporated (red curve) and if the stress and strain errors are incorporated (blue curve). Considering both errors
      results in a wider distribution of the Young’s modulus, but none of the distributions contain the true value.



275   previously. For the case in which model uncertainty is considered as a random variable coming from a
      Gaussian distribution with an input-dependent mean, we consider the following expression for its mean:

                                                         d() = a0 + a1  + a2 2 .                                                (31)
         In case model uncertainty is modelled as a random variable, either coming from a Gaussian distribution
      with constant parameters or coming from a Gaussian distribution with an input-dependent mean, infinitely
      wide uniform distributions are used as prior distributions for the model uncertainty parameters (xd ). How-
280   ever, for the case in which model uncertainty is described as a Gaussian process with a stationary covari-
      ance function, we have considered the following prior distributions for the model uncertainty parameters
                  T
      (xd = λ ψ ):
                                                                  2
                                                                      
                                             exp − (λ−λ2 prior )       if λ ≥ 0
                                                          2s
                                      π(λ) ∝                 λprior               ,                           (32)
                                             0                         otherwise
      and,
                                                                2
                                             exp − (ψ−ψ2
                                                          prior )
                                                                             if ψ ≥ 1.578 × 10−5
                                                      2s
                                      π(ψ) ∝            ψ prior                                       ,                            (33)
                                              0                              otherwise
                                             

      where λprior = 0.025 GPa, sλprior = 0.0083 GPa, ψ prior = 0.0006 and sψprior = 0.0003.
285       It must be noted that if infinitely wide uniform distributions are used for the model uncertainty parameters
      of the Gaussian process, the MCMC algorithm fails to converge. Using the fact that the model uncertainty
      function (d()) is a smooth function, we have chosen the mean of the prior for the length scale parameter
      (ψ prior ) to be half of the maximum occurring strain. The standard deviation is chosen to be relatively large.
      To prevent negative length scale parameters and length scale parameters smaller than the minimum distance
290   between two consecutive strains to be realised from the prior distribution, we have set a lower bound on
      the prior distribution. We have chosen the value of the mean of the variance of the GP (λprior in Eq. (32))


                                                                     10
             (a) Error in the stress measurements only                (b) Error in both the stress and strain measurements

      Figure 3: Linear elasticity: The measurements, the posterior mean response and the posterior predictions. One can observe
      that the incorporation of both error sources results in a wider envelope, thereby including more measurements.



      as 10% of the maximum occurring stress and the standard deviation such that 99.7% of the realisations
      coming from the prior distribution remain below 20% of the maximum occurring stress. A lower bound is
      also included (Eq. (32)).
295       Fig. 4(a) shows that the incorporation of model uncertainty increases the widths of the posteriors, such
      that the true value is possible to be generated from it. On the other hand, the MAP point (point estimator)
      when model uncertainty is not incorporated is closer to the true value than all the other posteriors’ MAP
      points.
          An important point to mention here is that in case model uncertainty is incorporated as a random
300   variable coming from a normal distribution with an input-dependent mean, the marginal posterior PDF is
      approximately the same as the prior of the Young’s. The reason for this is the linear term that is present in
      the input-dependent mean (a1  in Eq. (31)), which is also present in the model (E). If we ignore the linear
      term and instead use the following expression for the input-dependent mean:

                                                         d() = a0 + a2 2 ,                                              (34)
      we obtain the PDF presented in Fig. 4(b). The figure shows that the marginal posterior includes the true
305   value of the Young’s modulus. The MAP point has furthermore moved substantially closer to the true
      value. This can be caused by the fact that the true response (Eq. (29)) is not highly nonlinear and hence,
      its difference with the linear approximation (here E) can be rather accurately described by the remaining
      terms of the Taylor expansion of the true model.
          The posterior predictions for the three kinds of model uncertainty are presented in Figs. 5(a), 5(c) and
310   5(e). The diagrams show that if model uncertainty is considered as a random variable coming from a normal
      distribution, either with constant parameters or an input-dependent mean, more measurements are included
      in the envelope than if model uncertainty is represented by a Gaussian process. By comparing Figs. 3
      and 5(e) furthermore, it becomes clear that more measurement data is present in the posterior prediction’s
      envelope if both errors in the stress and strain are considered than if model uncertainty is considered as a
315   Gaussian process without input error. This can be caused by the fact that, although the posterior is wider,
      the mean and MAP point are further from the true value if model uncertainty is described by a Gaussian
      process (see Fig. 4(a) and Table 1).
          The effect of treating the input error as well as incorporating model uncertainty is presented in Fig. 6 for
      the marginal posteriors. Note that we have used the same priors as before. One can see that the posteriors


                                                                 11
                               (a)                                                               (b)

Figure 4: Linear elasticity: Marginal posteriors for the Young’s modulus for different types of model uncertainty. (a) The
mean for model uncertainty as a random variable coming from a Gaussian distribution with input-dependent mean, is given by
Eq. (31). One can observe that incorporating any of the model uncertainties results in wider posterior distributions. Although
the MAP point moves further away from the true value for all model uncertainty cases, all their posteriors include the true
value, whereas the posterior for the case without model uncertainty does not include the true value. It must furthermore be
noted that the posterior for the case in which model uncertainty is treated as a random variable coming from a Gaussian
distribution with an input-dependent mean, is practically the same as the prior of the Young’s modulus. (b) The same marginal
posteriors as in (a), except that the case in which model uncertainty is modelled as a random variable coming from a normal
distribution with an input-dependent mean, Eq. (34) is used for the mean instead of Eq. (31). One can see that the MAP point
has moved considerably closer to the true value. This can be caused by the fact that the true stress-strain behaviour given in
Eq. (29) is not highly nonlinear and the difference between σ(, a, E) in Eq. (29) and linear elasticity (E) can rather accurately
be represented by the remaining terms of a Taylor expansion for σ(, a, E).




                                                                12
                                   (a)                                                     (b)
                                     Normal distribution with constant parameters




                                   (c)                                                     (d)
                                 Normal distribution with an input-dependent mean




                                   (e)                                                     (f)
                                                      Gaussian process
Figure 5: Linear elasticity: The measurements, the posterior mean responses and the posterior predictions. Left: without input
error and right: including input error. One can see that if model uncertainty is described by a random variable coming from
a normal distribution either with constant parameters or an input-dependent mean, more measurements are present inside
the posterior’s predictions interval than if a Gaussian process is considered. In case model uncertainty is a Gaussian process
furthermore, one can see that including the input error results in more measurements to be present inside the posterior prediction
bounds (cf. Figs. 5(e) and 5(f)).




                                                               13
            (a) Normal distribution with constant parameters        (b) Normal distribution with an input-dependent
                                                                    mean




                                                         (c) Gaussian process

      Figure 6: Linear elasticity: Marginal posteriors of the Young’s modulus for three kinds of model uncertainty including input
      error. One can see that if model uncertainty is described by a random variable coming from a normal distribution (either with
      constant parameters or an input-dependent mean) the marginal posterior becomes wider if the input error is incorporated. In
      case model uncertainty is represented by a Gaussian process, the marginal posterior gets slightly narrower.



320   become wider if the input error is incorporated, except for the Gaussian process. That posterior has however
      changed such that the true value is less in its tail, than if the input error is not incorporated.
         The posterior predictions for all three model uncertainties if the input error is also considered are shown
      in Figs. 5(b), 5(d) and 5(f). One can see that for both cases in which model uncertainty is a random
      variable, the posterior mean responses move closer to the measurement data. In case model uncertainty is
325   considered as a Gaussian process, including the input error results in a wider envelope that includes more
      data (cf. Figs. 5(e) and 5(f)). Also the only data point not present in the envelope is still closer to the
      envelope if the input error is considered. The numerical values for the marginal posteriors mean, MAP point
      and standard deviation are given in Table 1.

      6.3. Linear elasticity-linear hardening
330       For linear elasticity, we have shown that considering the error in the strain and model uncertainty leads
      to wider marginal posteriors of the Young’s modulus (except if model uncertainty is treated as a Gaussian
      process). This can generally be considered as an improvement, because either the true value was present
      inside the wider distributions or the MAP point has moved towards the true value. For this case we have


                                                                   14
      Table 1: Linear elasticity: The numerical values of the mean, the MAP point and the standard deviation of the marginal
      posterior PDFs of the Young’s modulus for all considered cases.


                      Model uncertainty               Mean (GPa)          MAP (GPa)      Standard deviation (GPa)
                                                    Error in the stress only
                           None                         193.5201        193.5201                  3.0861
                  Random variable from
                   a normal distribution            184.7892        185.6223                      10.7162
                 with constant parameters
                  Random variable from
                   a normal distribution            198.3326        209.6297                      33.5192
              with an input-dependent mean
             Gaussian process with a stationary
                                                    173.8981        191.6519                      21.5282
                    covariance function
                                             Error in the stress and strain
                           None                     193.7848        193.6629                      4.3032
                  Random variable from
                   a normal distribution            209.7249        208.3623                      15.9041
                 with constant parameters
                  Random variable from
                   a normal distribution            180.6751        187.1383                      42.6510
              with an input-dependent mean
             Gaussian process with a stationary
                                                    179.6355        184.3772                      19.4364
                    covariance function


      generated the data using relations that are not too different from the model response of interest. This has
335   allowed us to compare the identified distributions with the true values. However, the measurement data
      may deviate considerably more from the model response. In this subsection, we present examples for linear
      elasticity-linear hardening. Because the deviation between the curves used to generate the data and the
      model response is so significant, we will not be able to compare the distributions with true values. Instead,
      we will only investigate the posterior predictions. We have initially generated 30 measurements using the
340   following curve:
                                                            p
                                          σ(, a, max ) = a 2max − (max − )2 ,                             (35)
      where a = 50 GPa, 0 ≤  ≤ max and max = 0.0056. Similar as in the previous subsection, output and
      input noise was generated using sωy = 0.01 GPa and sω∗ = 5 × 10−5 (see Fig. 7 for the measurements).
      The linear elastic-linear hardening model is used as the material description. This entails that we want to
      identify Young’s modulus E, initial yield stress σy0 and hardening modulus H. The same prior distribution
345   as in Eq. (30) is used for the Young’s modulus with E prior = 100 GPa, sE prior = 50 GPa. The prior for the
      yield stress and the hardening modulus read:
                                                                          2
                                               
                                               exp − (σy0 −σ
                                                   
                                                                y0 prior )
                                                             2
                                                           2sσ
                                                                             if σy0 ≥ 0
                                     π(σy0 ) ∝                 y0 prior                 ,                    (36)
                                                 0                           otherwise
                                               

      and
                                                                  2
                                                                      
                                                 exp − (H−H
                                                           2
                                                             prior )
                                                                             if H ≥ 0
                                                              2s
                                        π(H) ∝                  H prior                  ,                             (37)
                                                 0                          otherwise


                                                               15
      where σ y0 prior = 0.25 GPa, sσy0 prior = 0.025 GPa, H prior = 30 GPa and sH prior = 15 GPa. In case model
      uncertainty is described by a random variable coming from a normal distribution with an input-dependent
350   mean, the relation of Eq. (31) is used for the mean. Furthermore, the prior distributions of the covariance
      function’s parameters for the Gaussian process are given in Eqs. (32) and (33) with λprior = 0.03 GPa,
      sλprior = 0.01 GPa, ψ prior = 0.0028 and sψprior = 9.3333 × 10−4 . The lower limit for length scale parameter
      ψ is set to 2.5 × 10−5 .
          The posterior predictions are presented in Fig. 7. Two main issues can be observed. (1) By comparing
355   Figs. 7(a) and 7(b), it can be noticed that including the error in the strain results in a wider prediction
      interval. This is especially true for the initial part of the response in which the model response is only
      governed by elasticity. This is due to the fact that the Young’s modulus is larger than the stiffness during
                                        HE
      elastoplastic deformation (i.e. H+E     in Eq.(2)). (2) Considering model uncertainties furthermore results in
      wide posterior prediction envelopes, which consequently include almost all measurement and verification
360   points. Only for the case in which model uncertainty is represented by a random variable coming from a
      normal distribution with constant parameters, two verification points are not present within the bounds. One
      should note however, that in the cases in which model uncertainty is input-dependent, the model uncertainty
      is so dominant that the two linear regimes in the model response (the elastic regime and the elastoplastic
      regime) cannot be recognised anymore.
365       It is also worth to mention that in case the difference between the constitutive model (here linear elasticity-
      linear hardening) and the true response used to generate the measurements (here Eq. (35)) is large, the
      influence of incorporating model uncertainty is larger than that of incorporating the error in the strain.
      Incorporating the error in the strain, if model uncertainty is to be incorporated, can still have a positive
      influence however, as we have presented for linear elasticity.
370       In the examples in which linear elasticity were considered, we were able to compare not just the posterior
      predictions with the measurement data, but also the marginal posteriors with the true values. In case of
      linear elasticity-linear hardening, it is not possible to compare the marginal posteriors with the true values,
      because the material model and the true response do not share any parameters. In the case of linear elasticity-
      linear hardening therefore, we have introduced and will introduce verification points in order to compare the
375   posterior predictions in more detail. In Fig. 7, we have shown verification points inside the domain of the
      measured strains. Now, we will add verification data outside the strain domain and investigate the posterior
      predictions for the verification points outside the initial strain domain.
          Instead of 30 measurements, we now consider 20 measurements, polluted by noise coming from the
      aforementioned noise distributions. All priors and their parameters remain the same, except that the co-
380   variance function’s parameters for the Gaussian process are set to λprior = 0.026 GPa, sλprior = 0.0087 GPa,
      ψ prior = 0.0018 and sψprior = 0.0006. The lower limit for length scale parameter ψ is set to 2.5 × 10−5 .
          The posterior predictions are shown in Fig. 8, together with the measurement and verification data. It
      can be observed that all verification data are inside the posterior predictions’ bounds if model uncertainty
      is described by a random variable coming from a normal distribution with constant parameters or by a
385   Gaussian process. In case model uncertainty is described by a Gaussian process furthermore, the uncertainty
      is substantially larger than if a random variable coming from a normal distribution with constant parameters
      is used. This can be due to the fact that the Gaussian process assumes the measurements to be correlated,
      and hence, the larger the distance from the measured data, less information is available and a larger spread
      is observed. It can furthermore be observed that the smallest number of verification data is present inside
390   the posterior prediction’s bounds if model uncertainty is represented by a normal distribution with an input-
      dependent mean. It must be noted though, that if another relation for the mean would be selected, the
      posterior predictions would differ.

      7. Conclusions

          In this contribution, we have formulated a Bayesian approach that considers the output error (the error
395   in the stress), the input error (the error in the strain) and the uncertainty of the model in order to identify
      parameters in elasticity and elastoplasticity from monotonically increasing uniaxial tensile tests. We have


                                                              16
      treated three types of model uncertainty: (1) a random variable coming from a normal distribution with
      constant parameters, (2) a random variable coming from a normal distribution with an input-dependent
      mean and (3) a Gaussian process with a stationary covariance function.
400       We have applied the identification approach to linear elasticity and linear elasticity-linear hardening. The
      measurement data were artificially generated, allowing us to compare the parameter distributions with the
      true values for linear elasticity because the material models and the true responses, used to generate the
      measurement data, shared parameters. For linear elasticity-linear hardening the difference between the true
      response, used to generate the measurement data, and the material model response was so significant that
405   no parameters were shared by the two. Consequently, we have only used posterior predictions to assess the
      quality of the results.
          The results for linear elasticity show that incorporating any of the three model uncertainty formulations
      results in wider marginal posterior distributions of the Young’s modulus. Consequently, the chance that
      the posterior distributions include the true value increases. Incorporating model uncertainty also results in
410   wider posterior prediction intervals, which therefore contain more measurements.
          If, in addition to model uncertainty, the error in the strain is also incorporated, the marginal posterior
      (distribution) of the Young’s modulus becomes even wider. The exception is the case in which model
      uncertainty is described by a Gaussian process (with a stationary covariance function). The posterior becomes
      narrower in this case, but the evaluation of the posterior at the true value is nevertheless larger. In other
415   words, the true value has a higher chance to be realised from the posterior.
          Incorporating the error in the strain (input error), as well as model uncertainty, also results in wider
      posterior prediction intervals, which are therefore more likely to contain the measurement data. If model
      uncertainty is described by a Gaussian process however, the posterior prediction interval does not become
      wider, but still contains more measurements than if the input error is not included.
420       Our results generally show that incorporating both model uncertainty and the input error has a favourable
      influence on the identified parameters and the posterior predictions, compared to only incorporating model
      uncertainty or only incorporating the input error. If the difference between the true response (used to
      generate the measurements) and the response of the material model increases however, the added value of
      incorporating the input error as well reduces substantially.

425   Acknowledgements
          The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the University of Luxembourg and the
      European Research Council Starting Independent Research Grant (ERC Stg grant agreement No. 279578)
      entitled “Towards real time multiscale simulation of cutting in nonlinear materials with applications to
      surgical simulation and computer guided surgery”.

430   Appendix A. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
         Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques are frequently employed numerical approaches to explore
      posteriors [45, 47], when they are too complex to be analytically analysed. Below, the Monte Carlo method
      and the adaptive Metropolis algorithm are discussed as means to explore the posterior PDF.

      Appendix A.1. Monte Carlo principle
435      Consider that ns samples are drawn from a PDF of interest that we denote by πpost (for the case
      mentioned above, πpost = π(x, xd |y)). Then, the following integral can be approximated by averaging the
      values of function f(x) for the drawn ns samples.
                                                    ns          Z
                                        bfint = 1
                                                   X
                                                       f(xi ) ≈      f(x)πpost (x)dx,                           (A.1)
                                                ns i=1           Rnp
                 n
      where {xi }i s is the finite set of samples drawn from πpost . From here onwards, we use hats on top of letters
      and symbols to denote their numerical approximations. Using the Monte Carlo principle, posterior’s mean


                                                             17
440   x                 \ and the component of the posterior’s covariance matrix at the j th row and lth
      bpost , MAP point MAP
      column can be approximated as follows [45]:
                                                                          ns
                                                              bpost = 1
                                                                         X
                                                              x              xi ,                                                       (A.2)
                                                                      ns i=1

                                                       \ = argmax π(xi ),
                                                       MAP                                                                              (A.3)
                                                                       xi;i=1,...,ns

      and

                                  ns 
                              1   X                                                
            (d
             covpost )jl =               (xi )j − (x
                                                   bpost )j                  bpost )l , j = 1, 2, · · · , np , l = 1, 2, · · · , np .
                                                                   (xi )l − (x                                                          (A.4)
                             ns−1 i=1

      Appendix A.2. The adaptive Metropolis algorithm
          The Metropolis-Hastings [45] method is a frequently employed Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
445   approach. In case a symmetric proposal is used, the algorithm is commonly referred to as a Metropolis
      algorithm.
          The Metropolis algorithm explores the posterior PDF by a random walk in the parameter space x. We
      consider sample xi and the evaluation of the PDF of interested at this sample πpost (xi ). New sample xp is
      then proposed by drawing from proposal distribution q(xp |xi ). If the PDF of interest at the proposed sample
450   (πpost (xp )) is larger than its value at the current sample (πpost (xi )), the proposed sample is always accepted
      (this is correct if the proposal distribution in the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is symmetric which is the
      case in the Metropolis algorithm). If πpost (xp ) < πpost (xi ) however, the proposed sample may be accepted as
      the new sample. This depends on ratio r in Algorithm 1. If the proposed sample is rejected, the old sample
      is taken as the new sample. The algorithm is repeated for many samples and post-processing, in which the
455   evolution of the statistical summaries is investigated, must point out if convergence is achieved.
          The conventional Metropolis algorithm has the disadvantage that proposal distribution’s parameters
      q(xp |xi ) must be manually tuned. Consequently, an adaptive variant was introduced by Haario et al. [43] in
      order to avoid this issue. The parameters of the proposal distribution are updated based on the knowledge
      about the posterior, harvested from the previous samples. We update the proposal distribution once every
460   1000 samples.
          Often, a Gaussian distribution is used as a symmetric proposal distribution. In the adaptive Metropolis
      algorithm, this reads as:

                                                         q(xp |xi ) = N (xi , γ 2 R),                                                   (A.5)
      where γ 2 R denotes a covariance matrix of size np × np , with np as the number of unknown parameters and
      hence, the number of dimensions of the posterior. γ must be selected initially and matrix R is updated
                                                                              2.38
465   based on the previous samples. We use the following initial value γ = √   np , proposed by Gelman et al. [48].
      Matrix R is established by storing all nK previous samples in matrix K of size nK × np . R is then computed
      as follows:
                                                                        1    e T K,
                                                              R=             K   e                                                      (A.6)
                                                                      nK − 1
            e = K − Kmean and Kmean reads:
      where K
                                                                     
                                                                kmean
                                                               kmean 
                                                       Kmean =  .                         ,                                           (A.7)
                                                                     
                                                                .. 
                                                                         kmean     nK ×np


                                                                          18
      and kmean is a row matrix of length np which is determined as follows:

                                           1 nP           n               n
                                              K            K               K
                                                                                    
                                                          P               P
                                kmean =          (K)i1        (K)i2 · · ·     (K)inp .                                (A.8)
                                          nK i=1         i=1              i=1

470         Algorithm 1 shows the Metropolis algorithm with the adaptive proposal (Eq. (A.5)).

      Algorithm 1 The Metropolis algorithm with the adaptive proposal
                                                     2.38
       1: select initial sample x0 ∈ Rnp and set γ = √ n          p
       2: for i = 0, 1, 2, ..., ns − 1 do
       3:    draw xp ∈ Rnp from the proposal distribution q(xp |xi ) in Eq. (A.5)
                                                                    
                                                        π     (xp )
       4:      calculate the ratio r(xi , xp ) = min 1, πpost
                                                          post (xi )

       5:    draw u ∈ [0, 1] from uniform distribution
       6:    if r(xi , xp ) ≥ u then
       7:        xi+1 = xp
       8:    else
       9:        xi+1 = xi
      10:    end if
      11:    per 1000 samples
      12:         update matrix K  e
      13: end for




      Appendix B. Posterior predictive distribution

          One can predict new measurements, based on the current measurements using the posterior predictive
      distribution. In the case in which no model uncertainties are considered, the posterior predictive distribution
      of new measurement y new , π(y new |y, , new ) results from the following integral [5]:
                                                          Z
                                       new        new
                                   π(y |y, ,  ) =             π(y new |x, new )π(x|y, )dx,                  (B.1)
                                                               Rnp
                                T
475   where  = 1 · · · nm          denotes the vector of measured strains, at which stresses y are measured.
      Furthermore, new denotes the new strain, for which we want to predict new stress y new . The integral in
      Eq. (B.1) can normally not be computed analytically [5]. In practise however, one can use the MCMC
      approach to approximate Eq. (B.1). Since we have already sampled the posterior, we can straightforwardly
      replace the ith sample in π(y new |xi , new ) and then draw sample yinew from π(y new |xi , new ) [45]. Furthermore,
480   the posterior mean response reads [5]:
                                                      Z
                                             y new =     y new π(y new |y, , new )dy new .                           (B.2)
                                                        R

      The integral given in Eq. (B.2) is in practise, again, approximated numerically using Monte Carlo integration.
      More information about posterior predictive analyses can be found in [5].
         In case of model uncertainty, the posterior predictive distribution reads:
                                                 Z     Z
                              new        new
                           π(y |y, ,  ) =                 π(y new |x, xd , new )π(x, xd |y, )dxdxd ,      (B.3)
                                                      Rnd   Rnp
      where nd denotes the number of parameters of the model uncertainty formulation. Note that we have
485   assumed that the measurement noise parameters are known.




                                                                      19
      References

       [1] L. A. A. Beex, C. W. Verberne, R. H. J. Peerlings, Experimental identification of a lattice model for
           woven fabrics: Application to electronic textile, Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing
           48 (Supplement C) (2013) 82–92.
490    [2] L. L. Magorou, F. Bos, F. Rouger, Identification of constitutive laws for wood-based panels by means
           of an inverse method, Composites Science and Technology 62 (4) (2002) 591–596.
       [3] K. Genovese, L. Lamberti, C. Pappalettere, Improved global-local simulated annealing formulation for
           solving non-smooth engineering optimization problems, International Journal of Solids and Structures
           42 (1) (2005) 203–237.
495    [4] C. Elster, G. Wübbeler, Bayesian regression versus application of least squares-an example, Metrologia
           53 (1) (2016) S10.
       [5] J. L. Beck, Bayesian system identification based on probability logic, Structural Control and Health
           Monitoring 17 (7) (2010) 825–847.
       [6] D. Higdon, H. Lee, Z. Bi, A Bayesian approach to characterizing uncertainty in inverse problems using
500        coarse and fine scale information, IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 50 (2002) 388–399.
       [7] J. Wang, N. Zabaras, A Bayesian inference approach to the inverse heat conduction problem, Interna-
           tional Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 47 (17-18) (2004) 3927–3941.

       [8] P. Risholm, F. Janoos, I. Norton, A. J. Golby, W. M. Wells, Bayesian characterization of uncertainty
           in intra-subject non-rigid registration, Medical image analysis 17 (5) (2013) 538–555.
505    [9] S. Lan, T. Bui-Thanh, M. Christie, M. Girolami, Emulation of higher-order tensors in manifold Monte
           Carlo methods for Bayesian inverse problems, Journal of Computational Physics 308 (2016) 81–101.

      [10] J. Isenberg, Progressing from least squares to Bayesian estimation, in: Proceedings of the 1979 ASME
           design engineering technical conference, New York, 1979, pp. 1–11.
      [11] K. F. Alvin, Finite element model update via Bayesian estimation and minimization of dynamic resid-
510        uals, AIAA journal 35 (5) (1997) 879–886.

      [12] J. L. Beck, L. S. Katafygiotis, Updating models and their uncertainties. I: Bayesian statistical framework,
           Journal of Engineering Mechanics 124 (4) (1998) 455–461.
      [13] T. Marwala, S. Sibusiso, Finite element model updating using Bayesian framework and modal properties,
           Journal of Aircraft 42 (1) (2005) 275–278.
515   [14] T. C. Lai, K. H. Ip, Parameter estimation of orthotropic plates by Bayesian sensitivity analysis, Com-
           posite Structures 34 (1) (1996) 29–42.
      [15] F. Daghia, S. de Miranda, F. Ubertini, E. Viola, Estimation of elastic constants of thick laminated
           plates within a Bayesian framework, Composite Structures 80 (3) (2007) 461–473.
      [16] J. M. Nichols, W. A. Link, K. D. Murphy, C. C. Olson, A Bayesian approach to identifying structural
520        nonlinearity using free-decay response: Application to damage detection in composites, Journal of Sound
           and Vibration 329 (15) (2010) 2995–3007.
      [17] C. Gogu, W. Yin, R. Haftka, P. Ifju, J. Molimard, R. Le Riche, A. Vautrin, Bayesian identification of
           elastic constants in multi-directional laminate from moiré interferometry displacement fields, Experi-
           mental Mechanics 53 (4) (2013) 635–648.



                                                            20
525   [18] P. S. Koutsourelakis, A novel Bayesian strategy for the identification of spatially varying material prop-
           erties and model validation: An application to static elastography, International Journal for Numerical
           Methods in Engineering 91 (3) (2012) 249–268.
      [19] C. Gogu, R. Haftka, R. L. Riche, J. Molimard, A. Vautrin, Introduction to the Bayesian approach
           applied to elastic constants identification, AIAA journal 48 (5) (2010) 893–903.

530   [20] T. Most, Identification of the parameters of complex constitutive models: Least squares minimization
           vs. Bayesian updating, in: D. Straub (Ed.), Reliability and optimization of structural systems, CRC
           press, 2010, pp. 119–130.
      [21] B. V. Rosić, A. Kčerová, J. Sýkora, O. Pajonk, A. Litvinenko, H. G. Matthies, Parameter identification
           in a probabilistic setting, Engineering Structures 50 (2013) 179–196, Engineering Structures: Modelling
535        and Computations (special issue IASS-IACM 2012).
      [22] M. Muto, J. L. Beck, Bayesian updating and model class selection for hysteretic structural models using
           stochastic simulation, Journal of Vibration and Control 14 (1-2) (2008) 7–34.
      [23] P. Liu, S. K. Au, Bayesian parameter identification of hysteretic behavior of composite walls, Proba-
           bilistic Engineering Mechanics 34 (2013) 101–109.
540   [24] D. D. Fitzenz, A. Jalobeanu, S. H. Hickman, Integrating laboratory creep compaction data with nu-
           merical fault models: A Bayesian framework, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 112 (B8),
           B08410.

      [25] W. P. Hernandez, F. C. L. Borges, D. A. Castello, N. Roitman, C. Magluta, Bayesian inference applied
           on model calibration of fractional derivative viscoelastic model, in: V. Steffen Jr, D. A. Rade, W. M.
545        Bessa (Eds.), DINAME 2015 - Proceedings of the XVII International symposium on dynamic problems
           of mechanics, Natal, 2015.
      [26] H. Rappel, L. A. A. Beex, S. P. A. Bordas, Bayesian inference to identify parameters in viscoelasticity,
           Mechanics of Time-Dependent Materials.
           URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11043-017-9361-0
550   [27] M. C. Kennedy, A. O’Hagan, Bayesian calibration of computer models, Journal of the Royal Statistical
           Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 63 (3) (2001) 425–464.
      [28] D. Higdon, J. Gattiker, B. Williams, M. Rightley, Computer model calibration using high-dimensional
           output, Journal of the American Statistical Association 103 (482) (2008) 570–583.
      [29] J. McFarland, S. Mahadevan, Multivariate significance testing and model calibration under uncertainty,
555        Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 197 (29) (2008) 2467–2479.
      [30] G. B. Arhonditsis, D. Papantou, W. Zhang, G. Perhar, E. Massos, M. Shi, Bayesian calibration of
           mechanistic aquatic biogeochemical models and benefits for environmental management, Journal of
           Marine Systems 73 (1) (2008) 8–30.
      [31] S. Sankararaman, Y. Ling, C. Shantz, S. MahadevaA, Inference of equivalent initial flaw size under
560        multiple sources of uncertainty, International Journal of Fatigue 33 (2) (2011) 75–89.
      [32] P. D. Arendt, D. W. Apley, W. Chen, Quantification of model uncertainty: Calibration, model discrep-
           ancy, and identifiability, Journal of Mechanical Design 134 (10) (2012) 100908.
      [33] K. V. Yuen, L. S. Katafygiotis, Bayesian modal updating using complete input and incomplete response
           noisy measurements, Journal of Engineering Mechanics 128 (3) (2002) 340–350.




                                                            21
565   [34] S. F. Gull, Bayesian data analysis: Straight-line fitting, in: J. Skilling (Ed.), Maximum entropy and
           Bayesian methods, Vol. 36 of Fundamental Theories of Physics, Springer Science & Business Media,
           Netherlands, 1989, pp. 511–518.
      [35] P. Dellaportas, D. A. Stephens, Bayesian analysis of errors-in-variables regression models, Biometrics
           51 (3) (1995) 1085–1095.

570   [36] R. J. Carroll, K. Roeder, L. Wasserman, Flexible parametric measurement error models, Biometrics
           55 (1) (1999) 44–54.
      [37] R. Scheines, H. Hoijtink, A. Boomsma, Bayesian estimation and testing of structural equation models,
           Psychometrika 64 (1) (1999) 37–52.

      [38] B. C. Kelly, Some aspects of measurement error in linear regression of astronomical data, The Astro-
575        physical Journal 665 (2) (2007) 1489.
      [39] D. W. Hogg, J. Bovy, D. Lang, Data analysis recipes: Fitting a model to data, ArXiv e-printsarXiv:
           1008.4686.

      [40] Y. Ling, J. Mullins, S. Mahadevan, Selection of model discrepancy priors in bayesian calibration, Journal
           of Computational Physics 276 (Supplement C) (2014) 665–680.
580   [41] Y. Xiong, W. Chen, K.-L. Tsui, D. W. Apley, A better understanding of model updating strategies
           in validating engineering models, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 198 (15)
           (2009) 1327–1337.

      [42] J. Brynjarsdóttir, A. O’Hagan, Learning about physical parameters: The importance of model discrep-
           ancy, Inverse Problems 30 (11) (2014) 114007.
585   [43] H. Haario, E. Saksman, J. Tamminen, Adaptive proposal distribution for random walk Metropolis
           algorithm, Computational Statistics 14 (3) (1999) 375–396.

      [44] C. E. Rasmussen, C. K. Williams, Gaussian processes for machine learning, Vol. 1, MIT press Cambridge,
           2006.
      [45] W. R. Gilks, S. Richardson, D. Spiegelhalter, Markov chain Monte Carlo in practice, CRC press, 1995.
590   [46] S. Hassani, Mathematical methods: For students of physics and related fields, Springer Science & Busi-
           ness Media, New York, 2008.

      [47] S. Brooks, A. Gelman, G. Jones, X. L. Meng, Handbook of Markov chain Monte Carlo, CRC press,
           2011.
      [48] A. Gelman, G. O. Roberts, W. R. Gilks, Efficient Metropolis jumping rules, in: J. M. Bernardo, J. O.
595        Berger, A. P. Dawid, A. F. M. Smith (Eds.), Bayesian statistics, Vol. 5 of Oxford Sci. Publ., Oxford
           University Press, New York, 1996, pp. 599–607.




                                                           22
                     (a) Error in the stress only                   (b) Error in both the stress and the strain




         (c) Normal distribution with constant parameters (d) Normal distribution with an input-dependent
                                                          mean




                                                    (e) Gaussian process

Figure 7: Linear elasticity-linear hardening: The measurements, the verification points, the posterior mean responses and
the posterior predictions. Note that for all cases in which model uncertainty is incorporated, the error in the strain is also
incorporated. One can see that considering model uncertainty results in more measurements to be present inside the bounds of
the posterior predictions. For the cases in which model uncertainty is input-dependent the model uncertainty is so dominant
that the two linear regimes in the model response (the elastic regime and the elastoplastic regime) cannot be recognised anymore.




                                                               23
                       (a) Error in the stress only                 (b) Error in both the stress and the strain




            (c) Normal distribution with constant parame- (d) Normal distribution                with    an   input-
            ters                                          dependent mean




                                                     (e) Gaussian process

Figure 8: Linear elasticity-linear hardening: The measurements, the verification points, the posterior mean responses and
the posterior predictions. Note that for all cases in which model uncertainty is incorporated, the error in the strain is also
incorporated. One can see that considering model uncertainty results in more measurements to be located inside the bounds
of the posterior predictions. It can be observed that all verification data are inside the posterior predictions’ bounds if model
uncertainty is described by a random variable coming from a normal distribution with constant parameters or by a Gaussian
process. In case model uncertainty is described by a Gaussian process furthermore, the uncertainty is substantially larger
than if a random variable coming from a normal distribution with constant parameters is used. This can be due to the fact
that the Gaussian process assumes the measurements to be correlated, and hence, the larger the distance from the measured
data, less information is available and a larger spread is observed. It can furthermore be observed that the smallest number of
verification data is present inside the posterior prediction’s bounds if model uncertainty is represented by a normal distribution
with an input-dependent mean. It must be noted though, that if another relation for the mean would be selected, the posterior
predictions would differ.



                                                               24
