            fluids
Article
A Numerical Study of Particle Migration and
Sedimentation in Viscoelastic Couette Flow
Michelle M. A. Spanjaards 1 , Nick O. Jaensson 2 , Martien A. Hulsen 1 and
Patrick D. Anderson 1, *
 1    Department of Mechanical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513,
      5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands; m.m.a.spanjaards@tue.nl (M.M.A.S.); m.a.hulsen@tue.nl (M.A.H.)
 2    Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 5, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland;
      nick.jaensson@mat.ethz.ch
 *    Correspondence: p.d.anderson@tue.nl
                                                                                                   
 Received: 16 January 2019; Accepted: 2 February 2019; Published: 11 February 2019                 


 Abstract: In this work, a systematic investigation of the migration of sedimenting particles in
 a viscoelastic Couette flow is presented, using finite element 3D simulations. To this end, a novel
 computational approach is presented, which allows us to simulate a periodic configuration of rigid
 spherical particles accurately and efficiently. To study the different contributions to the particle
 migration, we first investigate the migration of particles sedimenting near the inner wall, without
 an externally-imposed Couette flow, followed by the migration of non-sedimenting particles in
 an externally-imposed Couette flow. Then, both flows are combined, i.e., sedimenting particles with
 an externally-imposed Couette flow, which was found to increase the migration velocity significantly,
 yielding migration velocities that are higher than the sum of the combined flows. It was also found
 that the trace of the conformation tensor becomes asymmetric with respect to the particle center
 when the particle is initially placed close to the inner cylinder. We conclude by investigating the
 sedimentation velocity with an imposed orthogonal shear flow. It is found that the sedimentation
 velocity can be both higher or lower then the Newtonian case, depending on the rheology of the
 suspending fluid. Specifically, a shear-thinning viscosity is shown to play an important role, which is
 in-line with previously-published results.

 Keywords: migration; sedimentation; viscoelasticity




1. Introduction
     Suspensions of particles in viscoelastic fluids are encountered in many natural, biological,
and industrial processes. Examples of these suspensions are blood, paint, and pharmaceuticals.
Therefore, the behavior of particles suspended in a single viscoelastic fluid is of great interest.
Many practical applications also show the occurrence of cross-streamline migration of particles.
Examples are separation of particles with different sizes, suspensions in microfluidic devices where
migration can lead to non-homogenous particle distributions, cells in blood causing clots, which are
obstructing the flow, and other biosensing applications [1]. Furthermore, Couette flow devices are
often used as a rheometer, to measure the rheology of suspensions. Therefore, the migration behavior
of the particles is of great interest, since migration of particles will change the rheology of the fluid.
     Understanding the sedimentation behavior of particles in a viscoelastic shear flow can for
example be used to optimize the hydraulic fracturing process for obtaining natural gas. In this process,
solid particles in polymeric solutions are pumped into hydraulically-induced fractures under high
pressure. The particles must keep the fractures open in order to increase the rate of gas recovery.
In vertically-oriented fractures, sedimentation causes the particle to settle. Therefore, sedimentation


Fluids 2019, 4, 25; doi:10.3390/fluids4010025                                   www.mdpi.com/journal/fluids
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                    2 of 20



should be limited in order to limit settling and place the particles far into the fracture to increase
gas recovery [2].
      Migration of a sedimenting particle in a channel near a vertical wall was investigated by Singh
and Joseph [3]. They found that a falling particle initially placed close enough to the wall will migrate
towards the wall. However, in a Newtonian liquid, the sphere moves away from the vertical wall and
attains a steady position between the channel center and the wall.
      When the particle was placed in a shear flow, D’Avino et al. [4] found that three different regimes
can be recognized in the migration of the particle, depending on the distance of the particle from the
wall, where the migration velocity is initially linear with the particle position, but increases when
the particle approaches the wall and decreases again when the particle is in very close proximity to
the wall.
      Migration of a particle in a viscoelastic fluid in a Couette flow was numerically and experimentally
investigated by D’Avino et al. [5]. It was found that elasticity promotes migration of the particle
towards the outer cylinder for almost every initial position. Only if the particle was initially placed
very close to the inner cylinder, it would move towards it. Furthermore, a maximum in the migration
velocity was found when the particle moves closer to the outer cylinder. High Newtonian solvent
viscosity and shear thinning reduce the migration rate.
      The sedimentation of particles in a flow without shear has been studied extensively.
A dimensionless number called the sedimentation Weissenberg number relates the polymer relaxation
time scale to the flow time scale. It has been shown that at high values for Λ, the deformation of the
polymer is dominated by the flow due to the movement of the particle. This can cause significant
extension of the polymer around the particle, causing pronounced elastic effects in the wake of the
sphere that decrease the particle mobility [6–8].
      Many research works have also been devoted to the sedimentation of a particle in a shear flow [9].
Van den Brule et al. [10] performed experiments to gain more insight into the effects of fluid elasticity
on the settling velocity of spherical particles suspended in viscoelastic fluids. Here, the settling velocity
of a spherical particle was measured in three different fluids: a Newtonian fluid, a Boger fluid and
a shear-thinning fluid. From this study, it could be concluded that fluid elasticity plays a significant role
in reducing the settling velocity of a spherical particle in a viscoelastic fluid. Shear-thinning, however,
increased the settling velocity of the particles, since now the viscosity decreases with increasing shear
rate. This was also found in another study [11]. Padhy et al. [12] numerically investigated the effect of
viscoelasticity on the settling velocity of a particle in a cross-shear flow. Padhy et al. [12] calculated
the drag on a particle in their simulations and found that the drag in viscoelastic fluids is increased
indirectly through the increase of viscous stresses. The dominant contribution to the viscous stresses
becomes asymmetric when sedimentation and shear flow are combined, leading to a decrease in
settling velocity. The coupling between the two flows needs to be non-linear for the increase in drag to
be substantial. This non-linear coupling is only present in viscoelastic fluids.
      Murch et al. [13] recently numerically investigated the growth of viscoelastic wings and how this
reduces the particle mobility in a viscoelastic shear flow. They found that for high shear Weissenberg
numbers and sedimentation Weissenberg numbers of O(1), the particle mobility is decreased due to
the growth of viscoelastic wings around the particle.
      Migration is often a problem in flows that are more complex than simple shear, or pure
sedimentation. In the current paper, a first step up in complexity is offered, by combining two
flows that yield migration. The finite element method is used to investigate numerically the influence
of both the sedimentation and shear Weissenberg number on the migration and sedimentation of
a particle in a viscoelastic fluid under orthogonal shear in a Couette flow device. The mass of the
particle is varied via the downward force on the particle to create different local shear rates around the
falling particle, leading to different sedimentation Weissenberg numbers. Furthermore, the orthogonal
shear rate is varied to create different shear Weissenberg numbers. The influence of both Weissenberg
numbers on the sedimentation and migration of the particle is investigated, using a Giesekus model.
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                           3 of 20



Migration of the particle close to the inner cylinder of the Couette is studied systematically to see
how the different flow types influence the migration of the particle and what happens if the two
are combined.

2. Problem Statement
     The shear flow is created in a Couette flow device, by rotating the outer cylinder with a velocity
Uw , while keeping the inner cylinder stationary. When studying sedimentation, a force is applied to
the particle in the z-direction. To minimize the computational costs, only a part of the Couette flow
device is modeled, as is shown in Figure 1. Periodicity is assumed on surfaces S2 and S4 . The top and
bottom of the domain are assumed to be far enough away from the particle, to not feel the presence
of the particle. The angle φ, together with the inner radius Ri , the outer radius Ro , and the height
H define the size and shape of the domain. The spherical particle has radius a, and its boundary is
denoted by ∂P. A cylindrical coordinate system will be used throughout this paper, with components,
using the convention [r, θ, z]. The computational domain of the Couette is denoted by Ω. Note that the
positive z-direction is directed in the gravitation direction.




      Figure 1. Problem description of a rigid, spherical particle suspended in a viscoelastic Couette flow.
      The Couette flow is set up by moving the outer cylinder in the tangential direction, with velocity
      Uw , while the inner cylinder remains stationary. Simultaneously, a force acts on the particle in the
      z-direction, causing it to sediment. The inner cylinder boundary is denoted by S1 , the outer cylinder
      boundary is denoted by S3 . The top and bottom of the Couette are denoted by S5 and S6 , respectively.
      The periodic side boundaries are denoted by S2 and S4 , where S4 is rotated over an angle φ with respect
      to surface S2 .
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                    4 of 20



2.1. Governing Equations

2.1.1. Balance Equations
    It is assumed that the fluid is incompressible, that inertia can be neglected, and that there are
no external body forces acting on the fluid. This leaves the following equations for the balance of
momentum and balance of mass:

                                                −∇ · σ = 0               in Ω,                           (1)
                                                       ∇·u = 0           in Ω,                           (2)

where u is the fluid velocity and σ is the Cauchy stress tensor, which consists of three contributions:

                                               σ = − pI + 2ηs D + τ p ,                                  (3)

where p is the pressure, I the unit tensor, and ηs the solvent or Newtonian viscosity. Furthermore, D =
(∇u + ∇uT )/2 is the rate of deformation tensor, and τ p represents the viscoelastic stress tensor,
given by:
                                              τ p = G ( c − I ),                                     (4)

where c is the conformation tensor and G the polymer modulus, which equals ηp /λ. Here, ηp is the
polymer viscosity and λ the polymer relaxation time. The evolution of the conformation tensor c can
be described by the following equation using the Giesekus model [14]:

                                           O
                                          λ c + c − I + α(c − I )2 = 0,                                  (5)

                                               O
where α is the mobility parameter and () denotes the upper-convected derivative, which is defined as:

                                    O          D ()
                                    () =            − (∇u)T · () − () · ∇u,                              (6)
                                               Dt

where D ()/Dt is the material derivative denoted by D ()/Dt = ∂()/∂t + u · ∇().

2.1.2. Particle Motion
     It is assumed that the inertia of the particle can be neglected and that a force F ext = Fez is applied
to the particle. The balance of forces and the balance of torques that act on the particle can be expressed
as follows:
                                                   Z
                                                            σ · np dS = F ext ,                          (7)
                                                       ∂P
                                      Z
                                               ( x − X ) × (σ · np ) dS = 0,                             (8)
                                          ∂P

where np is the outwardly-directed unit normal vector on the boundary of the particle ∂P, X is the
position of the center point of the particle, and σ is evaluated on the fluid side of the particle boundary
∂P. The translational velocity of the particle is denoted by U, which is an unknown in the problem,
but will be such that Equation (7) is satisfied. The relation between the particle position and velocity is
obtained by the following kinematic equation:

                                                              dX
                                                                 = U.                                    (9)
                                                              dt
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                    5 of 20



2.2. Boundary Conditions
     On the particle boundary and rigid walls S1 and S3 , a no-slip condition is imposed. On S1 ,
the velocity is set to zero, whereas on S3 , the velocity is tangential to the curved surface. Periodicity of
the surfaces S2 and S4 is assumed. Surfaces S5 and S6 are assumed to be far enough from the particle
to not feel the presence of the particle. Symmetry is prescribed in surfaces S5 and S6 , i.e., the velocities
in the r- and θ-direction are left free, while the velocity in the z-direction is prescribed to be zero.
The velocities on the side curves of surfaces S5 and S6 are periodic in the θ- and r-direction. This yields
the following boundary conditions:

                              u = U + ω × (x − X )                    on ∂P,                            (10)
                              u=0                                     on S1 ,                           (11)
                              u · eθ = Uw                             on S3 ,                           (12)
                              u · er = u · e z = 0                    on S3 ,                           (13)
                              u · ez = 0                              on S5 and S6 ,                    (14)
                              t · er = t · e θ = 0                    on S5 and S6 ,                    (15)
                              u4 = R · u2 ,                                                             (16)
                              t4 = − R · t2 ,                                                           (17)

where ω is the particle angular velocity and the subscripts containing a number denoting the velocities
on the surfaces S1 up to S6 , respectively. Equation (16) imposes a periodic boundary condition for the
velocities on surfaces S2 and S4 . The traction vector on the surface with outwardly-directed normal n is
denoted by t = σ · n. The rotation φ of the velocities and tractions from surfaces S2 to S4 is performed
by the rotation tensor R. More details on the rotation tensor can be found in Appendices A and B.
On surface S6 , the solution of the conformation of cS of the problem without a particle is prescribed
since this surface is an inflow surface due to the rigid body movement of the whole mesh with the
particle, as will be explained in Section 3.3. This conformation cS is obtained by solving a separate 1D
problem of a Couette flow without the particle and using the steady state value of cS . This means that
for the conformation tensor, the following boundary condition is applied:

                                                c = cS on S6 .                                          (18)

     Furthermore, a periodic boundary condition is also applied for the conformation tensor on
surfaces S2 and S4 . This periodic boundary condition is imposed by the following equation in the
same way as is done for the velocities, but now for a tensor instead of a vector:

                                                c2 = R · c4 · R T .                                     (19)

     An initial condition is needed for the conformation tensor c. In order to reduce the computation
time, the steady-state solution for the problem without a particle is prescribed as the initial condition
for the conformation:
                                           c ( t = 0) = cS | t → ∞ .                                 (20)

2.3. Arbitrary Lagrange–Euler Formulation
     The domain is described with a boundary-fitted mesh that is moved in time in such a way that the
mesh moves with the particle, but not necessarily with the fluid. Therefore, the governing equations
have to be rewritten in the Arbitrary Lagrange–Euler (ALE) formulation [15]. The movement of the
grid has to be compensated. This only applies to the evolution equation of the conformation tensor,
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                6 of 20



since this is the only equation that contains a convective term. The material derivative in Equation (6)
is now written as:
                                       Dc     ∂c
                                           =       + (u − um ) · ∇c,                               (21)
                                       Dt     ∂t ξ
where ∂c/∂t|ξ denotes the time derivative in a fixed grid point and um is the mesh velocity.
Details about the mesh velocity will be explained in Section 3.3.

3. Numerical Method
     The finite element method is used to solve the problem. For the velocity and the pressure,
isoparametric, tetrahedral P2 P1 (Taylor–Hood) elements are used, whereas for the conformation,
tetrahedral P1 elements are used. In order to solve the constitutive equation, the log-conformation
representation [16] and DEVSS-G are used for stability [17].

3.1. Weak Formulation
     In this section, the weak formulation of the balance equations is presented. The motion of the
particle is enforced as a constraint, using the combined equation of motion approach [18]. The periodic
boundary condition for the velocity is also enforced as a constraint, using Lagrange multipliers.
The weak form of this problem can now be formulated as follows: find u, p, U, c, ω and λ such that:

   (∇v)T , ν(∇u − G T ) + D v , 2ηD + τ p − ∇ · v, p + v − (V + χ × ( x − X )), λ ∂P = V · F, (22)
                                                  


                                              ( H, −∇u + G T ) = 0,                                (23)

                                                  (q, ∇ · u) = 0,                                  (24)
                                                               Ds           
                                     d + τ (u − um ) · ∇d,        − g G, s        = 0,             (25)
                                                               Dt
                                       hµ, u − (U + ω × ( x − X ))i∂P = 0,                         (26)

for all admissible test functions v, H, q, d, χ, V , µ. Furthermore, D v = (∇v + (∇v) T )/2, and (·, ·)
denotes an inner product on domain Ω, whereas h·, ·i∂P is an inner product on ∂P; τ and ν are
parameters for SUPG and DEVSS-G stabilization, respectively, and s = log c. More information on
log-conformation stabilization and the function g can be found in [16], whereas more information on
the DEVSS-G method and the projected velocity gradient G can be found in [17]. A finite element
method on moving meshes aligned with the particle boundary is used to solve the equations. Since the
elements are aligned with the particle boundary, the inner product on ∂P can be calculated in the
nodes. This is done using a collocation method [18]:
                                                       ncoll
                     hµ, u − (U + ω × ( x − X ))i∂P = ∑ µk · [u( xk ) − (U + ω × ( xk − X ))],     (27)
                                                       k =1

where ncoll is the number of collocation points, which corresponds to the nodes on the particle
boundary. Furthermore, µk and xk are the Lagrange multiplier and coordinate of the kth collocation
point, respectively. The same approach can be used for the weak formulation of the periodic boundary
condition on the velocity. Note that the periodic surfaces have to be meshed such that the meshes are
also periodic.

3.2. Implementation Periodic Boundary Conditions
     In order to impose periodic boundary conditions for the velocity, the velocity has to be prescribed
such that the er , eθ and ez components on S2 and S4 are equal. This means that u4 is equal to u2 ,
but rotated. The actual implementation is done in Cartesian coordinates. The same approach is used
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                               7 of 20



for the periodic boundary condition for the conformation tensor, only now, a tensor rotation is used
instead of a vector rotation. More details on the implementation can be found in Appendices A and B.

3.3. Mesh Movement
     Since the mesh will move in time, it is necessary to move the mesh to track the particle boundary.
This is done using the ALE method. The starting mesh in the ALE method is used until it becomes too
distorted. When this happens, a new mesh, covering the same domain as the old one, is generated
using Gmsh [19], and the solution on the old mesh is projected onto the new one. The projection
problem is solved to obtain the solution variables on the new mesh. This remeshing and solving the
projection problem is done in the same way as was done by Jaensson et al. [20]. However, the projection
leads to inaccuracies, and the remeshing procedure is very time consuming. Therefore, the number of
remeshing steps should be reduced as much as possible during the simulations.
     The mesh velocity um can be set to an arbitrary value, and this can be exploited to reduce the
remeshing steps, or even avoid remeshing [15]. Therefore, the whole mesh moves as a rigid body
with the particle in the θ- and z-direction, while the mesh still deforms in the r-direction due to the
movement of the particle. The mesh displacement in the r-direction due to the migration of the particle
can be obtained by solving a Laplace equation, in order to guarantee a smooth mesh motion [15].

3.3.1. Prescribing the Conformation Tensor
     Since the conformation tensor obeys a hyperbolic partial differential transport equation,
the conformation has to be prescribed at inflow boundaries [21,22]. The bottom surface S6 of the
domain can be seen as an inflow surface, since the whole mesh is moved as a rigid body with the
particle in the z-direction. Therefore, a solution of the conformation tensor from the same problem
without a particle is prescribed at surface S6 .

3.4. Time Integration
      The time stepping approach now contains the following steps:

     Step 1: Compute the particle position at the beginning of every time step. The new particle
position can be found using an explicit Euler scheme for Equation (9):

                                           X 1 = X 0 + ∆tU 0 .                                    (28)

      For subsequent time steps, however, a second-order Adams–Bashforth scheme is used:

                                                    3     1
                                   X n+1 = X n + ∆t( U n − U n−1 ).                               (29)
                                                    2     2
      Step 2: Update the mesh, using the new particle position as explained in Section 3.3.

     Step 3: The mesh velocities can now be obtained by numerically differentiating the mesh
coordinates. For the first time step, the mesh velocity um is obtained in each node using a backward
differencing scheme:
                                                  x1 − x0m
                                            um = m         ,                                     (30)
                                                      ∆t
where x are the nodal coordinates of the mesh. For subsequent time steps, a second-order backward
differencing scheme is used:
                                           3 n +1
                                            x         n + 1 x n −1
                                                  − 2xm
                                  umn +1
                                         = 2 m            2 m
                                                                   .                          (31)
                                                     ∆t
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                  8 of 20



     The z- and θ-component of the mesh velocity are set equal to the particle velocity in the z- and
θ-direction. In this way, the whole mesh moves with the particle.

   Step 4: Compute un+1 and pn+1 . The method of D’Avino and Hulsen [23] for decoupling the
momentum balance from the constitutive equation is applied, using DEVSS-G for stability [17].

     Step 5: After solving for the new velocities and pressures, the actual conformation tensor cn+1 is
found using a second-order, semi-implicit Gear scheme with conformation prediction for Equation (5)
using SUPG and the log-conformation representation for stability. The conformation tensor is solved
component wise, meaning that not all conformation tensor components are known at the same time.
Because of this, it is not possible to enforce periodicity of c on surfaces S2 and S4 via a constraint.
Therefore, an iteration is performed until the periodic solution for c is found. During this iteration,
the conformation tensor has to be described on the inflow-nodes of surfaces S2 and S4 . See Section 3.3.1.
Therefore, it is first computed which of the nodes on surface S4 are inflow nodes by computing whether
(u − um ) · n is positive. Here, n is the normal vector of surface S4 . Due to periodicity, outflow nodes
on S2 have to be inflow nodes on S4 .

4. Results
     In this section, the convergence of the migration problem will be investigated. After that,
the results of the migration of a sedimenting particle without Couette flow, migration of a particle
in a Couette flow without sedimentation, and migration of a particle with the two flows combined
will be discussed. Finally, the results of the sedimentation of a particle in a Couette flow for two
different sets of fluid parameters will be discussed. In order to increase the sedimentation Weissenberg
number, the applied downward force on the particle is increased. Since a force is applied on the
particle, the sedimentation velocity of the particle is not known a priori. Therefore, the sedimentation
Weissenberg number is defined as follows:

                                                      UN
                                               Λ=λ       ,                                           (32)
                                                      2a

where UN is the Stokes velocity defined as UN = F/(6πη0 a). The shear Weissenberg number is
defined as:
                                                 Uw
                                        Wi = λ         .                               (33)
                                               Ro − Ri
     The ratio between the solvent viscosity and the total viscosity can be expressed as the ratio
between the solvent viscosity and the polymer viscosity and can be described as β = ηs /(ηp + ηs ).
The viscosity ratio β is chosen to be 0.35, together with a non-linear parameter α of 0.2. The particle is
positioned initially at a distance 3a from the inner cylinder of the Couette.
     The outer radius of the outer cylinder has a value of 90-times the particle radius, while the
radius of the inner cylinder has a value of 50-times the particle radius, yielding a gap size of 40-times
the particle radius. The height of the Couette flow device is 80-times the particle radius. To save
computational costs, only a part of the Couette flow device is modeled, where surface S4 is rotated
over an angle of θ = 45◦ with respect to surface S2 . By using θ = 45◦ , we actually model a Couette
flow with eight particles in it, because of the periodic boundary conditions. For this angle, the distance
between the particles is larger than 40-times the particle radius, which is large enough to exclude the
effect of particle–particle interactions [12].

4.1. Convergence
     In this section, the convergence of the migration problem will be investigated. Convergence was
the hardest to obtain for a high shear Weissenberg number combined with a high sedimentation
Weissenberg number. Therefore, a convergence study was performed for a shear Weissenberg number
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                              9 of 20



of Wi = 2 and a sedimentation Weissenberg number of Λ = 2. In order to choose a mesh with elements
small enough that convergence is reached, the migration velocity of a particle, made dimensionless by
dividing by a/λ, was plotted for different element sizes hp around the particle. For these simulations,
meshes were constructed with six elements across the gap of the Couette flow device and hp = 20,
hp = 30, and hp = 40 elements on the equator of the particle. This element size was extended over
a distance a from the particle and then slowly increased to the element size of the surrounding mesh
over a distance 9a. The mesh was refined near the inner radius of the Couette, where 15 elements
were placed along the inner radius. The mesh for hp = 30 is shown in Figure 2. The results for
mesh convergence are shown in Figure 3a. Time convergence was studied by plotting again the
dimensionless migration velocity of the particle, for a mesh with hp = 30, but now with different time
step sizes ∆t. The result is shown in Figure 3b. Note that we use quadratic elements for the velocity,
meaning that hp = 30 means 61 nodes on the equator of the particle, and six elements across the gap
means 13 nodes across the gap.




                         (a) Mesh                                         (b) Mesh refinement around particle

      Figure 2. Mesh that is refined around the particle boundary and at the inner cylinder for hp = 30.
      Red dotted lines in (a) indicate the cross-section SCS shown in (b).

                                                               0.04


                                                               0.02
       0.2

                                                                 0

       0.1
                                                              -0.02


        0                                                     -0.04


                                                              -0.06
      -0.1

                                                              -0.08

      -0.2
                                                               -0.1


      -0.3                                                    -0.12
             0   1   2   3   4      5   6    7    8                   0     1    2    3   4      5   6   7      8



                         (a) Mesh                                                     (b) Time

      Figure 3. Migration velocity of a particle placed at a distance 3a from the inner cylinder of a Couette
      for different element sizes around the particle hp and different time step sizes ∆t.
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                           10 of 20



     These figures show that for small enough element sizes and time step sizes, the lines superimpose.
The convergence is studied here for the most complicated scenario of high Weissenberg numbers
and the particle placed originally close to the inner cylinder. Since Figure 3 shows relatively good
convergence, we expected that convergence would be better for the less difficult scenarios. In order to
have a good balance between accuracy and computational costs, a element size of hp = 30 and a time
step size of ∆t = 0.05 were chosen for the simulations.

4.2. Migration
      In this section, it is investigated how the two complex flows (shear and sedimentation) influence
the migration of a particle placed close to the inner cylinder of a Couette flow device. In order to do
this, first the effect of the two separate complex flows is investigated. This is done for different initial
particle positions in the Couette flow device, close to the inner cylinder. The dimensionless particle
radial position is defined as:
                                                     xp − Ri
                                                Γ=           ,                                         (34)
                                                        a
where xp is the radial position of the center of the particle at time t/λ = 10 and a is the particle
radius. Therefore, Γ indicates how many times the particle radius is away from the inner cylinder.
The migration velocity at time t/λ = 10 is used in the figures in this Results Section. For a time
that is ten-times the relaxation time of the fluid, it was assumed that the viscoelastic stresses were
fully developed, and therefore, all transient effects were due to the migration of the particle. For the
representation of the results, the cross-section indicated in red in Figure 2 was used. From here on,
this cross-section is referred to as SCS .

4.2.1. Migration for a Falling Particle without Shear in Couette Flow
    The migration of a falling particle close to the inner cylinder of the Couette was first investigated
without applying a shear flow. This means that the velocity of the outer cylinder Uw = 0. The result is
shown in Figure 4. Here, the migration velocity Ur of the particle is made dimensionless with a/λ.


                         0.01



                            0



                        -0.01



                        -0.02



                        -0.03



                        -0.04



                        -0.05
                                0   1   2    3     4    5     6    7    8     9    10   11



      Figure 4. Migration velocity of the particle at different positions from the inner cylinder without shear
      and varying sedimentation Weissenberg number at time t/λ = 10. The shaded area indicates the
      inaccessible region.
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                         11 of 20



      This figure shows that the movement of the particle towards the inner cylinder slows down
significantly when the particle approaches the inner cylinder. For small values of Λ, it even seems to
become positive, i.e., the particle is migrating away from the inner cylinder. This effect of the wall
is much more severe for the case of a migrating particle in a Couette flow without sedimentation
than for a migrating particle without shear, but with sedimentation, as we will see in Section 4.2.2.
The figure also shows that the migration velocity goes to zero when the particle position is further
away from the inner cylinder. The movement of the particle towards the inner cylinder speeds up for
increasing Λ (i.e., higher negative Ur ). The trace of the conformation tensor around the particle for
initial particle positions Γi = 2 and Γi = 5 and Λ = 1 without shear is shown using SCS in Figure 5 at
time t/λ = 10. This figure shows that the trace of the conformation tensor around the particle becomes
slightly asymmetric and larger at the side of the particle close to the cylinder, when the particle is
positioned close to the inner cylinder.




                     (a) tr(c) for Γi = 2                                    (b) tr(c) for Γi = 5

      Figure 5. The trace of the conformation tensor around the particle for different initial positions from
      the inner cylinder at time t/λ = 10 for Λ = 1 and Wi = 0 using SCS .

4.2.2. Migration of a Particle in Couette Flow without Sedimentation
     The migration of the particle is now investigated for the case where there is no sedimentation,
but the shear rate is varied. This means that the downward force on the particle is set to zero and the
velocity of the outer cylinder Uw is varied. The result is shown in Figure 6.
     This figure shows that the movement of the particle towards the inner cylinder speeds up with
increasing shear Weissenberg number. For low values of Wi, the migration velocity is nearly zero,
independent of the position of the particle. For particles close to the inner cylinder, the migration
velocity is negative, indicating that the particle migrates towards the inner cylinder. For larger distances
from the inner cylinder, the migration velocity is positive for high values of Wi, i.e., the particle seems
to migrate away from the inner cylinder. Figure 7 shows the trace of the conformation tensor around
the migrating particle with Wi = 1 and no sedimentation, for an initial position Γi = 2 and Γi = 5
at time t/λ = 10 using SCS . This figure shows that the presence of the inner cylinder causes the
trace of the conformation to by asymmetric around the particle when the particle is placed close to it.
The conformation is higher at the side of the particle close to the inner cylinder, indicating that the
polymers are more stretched in the small gap between the particle and the inner cylinder.
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                         12 of 20




                     0.005

                         0

                     -0.005

                      -0.01

                     -0.015

                      -0.02

                     -0.025

                      -0.03

                     -0.035

                      -0.04
                              0   1     2    3   4     5     6     7     8     9     10     11


      Figure 6. Migration velocity of the particle at different positions from the inner cylinder without
      sedimentation and varying shear Weissenberg number at time t/λ = 10. The shaded area indicates the
      inaccessible region.




                      (a) tr(c) for Γi = 2                                   (b) tr(c) for Γi = 5

      Figure 7. The trace of the conformation tensor around the particle for different initial positions from
      the inner cylinder at time t/λ = 10 for Λ = 0 and Wi = 1, using SCS .

4.2.3. Migration of a Falling Particle in a Shear Flow
     Now, the two complex flows are combined by first fixing the shear Weissenberg number (Wi = 2)
and varying the sedimentation Weissenberg number and vice versa. The results are shown in Figure 8.
     Both figures show that when the particle approaches the inner cylinder Γ = 2, this slows down
the movement of the particle towards it for high shear and sedimentation Weissenberg numbers.
Here, the particle nearly touches the inner cylinder at t/λ = 10, drastically reducing the mobility of
the particle in the r-direction. Furthermore, it can be observed that combining the two complex flows
(solid lines) leads to significantly larger migration velocities than the superposition of the migration
velocities of the two separate flows (dashed lines). This effect was more pronounced for large values
of both Weissenberg numbers, indicating that for large values of Λ and high Wi, the coupling of the
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                                        13 of 20



flows becomes non-linear, and therefore, the migration velocity for the combination of the two flows
will no longer be a simple superposition of the migration velocities of the two separate flows.

      0.02                                                        0.02


        0                                                            0


     -0.02                                                        -0.02


     -0.04                                                        -0.04


     -0.06                                                        -0.06


     -0.08                                                        -0.08


      -0.1                                                         -0.1


     -0.12                                                        -0.12
             0   1   2   3     4   5   6   7    8   9   10   11           0   1   2   3     4   5   6   7    8   9   10   11




                             (a) Fixed Wi= 2                                              (b) Fixed Λ = 2

      Figure 8. Migration velocity of a particle placed at different initial positions from the inner cylinder
      with combined complex flows (solid lines) and the superposition of the two separate flows (dashed
      lines) at time t/λ = 10. The shaded area indicates the inaccessible region.

     Figure 9 shows the trace of the conformation tensor at time t/λ = 10 for initial particle positions
Γi = 2 and Γi = 5 for Λ = 1 and Wi = 1, using SCS . This figure again shows that the trace of
the conformation tensor is larger at the side of the particle close to the cylinder, when the particle
approaches it. For Γ = 5 the trace of the conformation tensor is symmetric and high at both sides of
the particle due to the shear flow.




                         (a) tr(c) for Γi = 2                                         (b) tr(c) for Γi = 5

      Figure 9. The trace of the conformation tensor around the particle for different initial positions from
      the inner cylinder at time t/λ = 10 for Λ = 1 and Wi = 1, using SCS .
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                        14 of 20



    Contour plots of the migration velocities for the two flows combined are shown in Figure 10 for
Γ = 2, Γ = 3, Γ = 4, Γ = 5.
    These contour plots show, that it is possible to influence the migration velocity of a particle by
combining shear and sedimentation flows and changing the shear and sedimentation Weissenberg
numbers. Figure 10b for example shows that the migration velocity can be accelerated, when both
Weissenberg numbers are high. The migration can be slowed down by lowering one, or both of these
Weissenberg numbers.

       2                                          0            2                                         0

      1.8                                         -0.01       1.8                                        -0.01

      1.6                                         -0.02       1.6                                        -0.02

      1.4                                         -0.03       1.4                                        -0.03

      1.2                                         -0.04       1.2                                        -0.04

       1                                          -0.05        1                                         -0.05

      0.8                                         -0.06       0.8                                        -0.06

      0.6                                         -0.07       0.6                                        -0.07

      0.4                                         -0.08       0.4                                        -0.08

      0.2                                         -0.09       0.2                                        -0.09

       0                                          -0.1         0                                         -0.1
            0        0.5    1           1.5   2                     0   0.5       1          1.5    2



                           (a) Γi = 2                                           (b) Γi = 3

       2                                          0            2                                         0

      1.8                                         -0.01       1.8                                        -0.005

      1.6                                         -0.02       1.6
                                                                                                         -0.01

      1.4                                         -0.03       1.4
                                                                                                         -0.015
      1.2                                         -0.04       1.2
                                                                                                         -0.02
       1                                          -0.05        1
                                                                                                         -0.025
      0.8                                         -0.06       0.8

                                                                                                         -0.03
      0.6                                         -0.07       0.6

      0.4                                         -0.08       0.4                                        -0.035


      0.2                                         -0.09       0.2                                        -0.04

       0                                          -0.1         0
            0        0.5    1           1.5   2                     0   0.5       1          1.5    2



                           (c) Γi = 4                                           (d) Γi = 5

      Figure 10. Contour plots of the migration velocities for combined shear and sedimentation flows.
      Markers x indicate the data points; between these points, the data are interpolated using the MATLAB R
      function contourf.

4.3. Sedimentation
      To investigate the influence of shear and sedimentation Weissenberg number on the sedimentation
of a particle, the two complex flows are combined. The particle is now placed initially in the middle
of the Couette flow device. Simulations are performed for two different sets of material parameters
shown in Table 1. Here, Fluid 1 is used to mimic a Boger fluid with a large value for β and small
value for α [24], so the effect of shear thinning can be excluded from the results. Fluid 2 has a much
higher value for α, meaning that the fluid is more shear thinning, and a slightly lower value for β.
These parameters are the same as for the migration simulations. The zero-shear viscosity η0 = ηs + ηp
is the same for both fluids.
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                                              15 of 20



                                                      Table 1. Material parameters.

                                                               β          Non-Linear Parameter α
                                                Fluid 1        0.5                 0.01
                                                Fluid 2       0.35                  0.2


     The sedimentation velocity for both fluids, scaled with the sedimentation velocity in a Newtonian
fluid with viscosity η0 = η + ηp , is plotted as a function of the shear Weissenberg number for different
sedimentation Weissenberg numbers in Figure 11.


       1.5
                                                                                   1.5

       1.4
                                                                                   1.4

       1.3
                                                                                   1.3

       1.2
                                                                                   1.2

       1.1
                                                                                   1.1

            1                                                                           1

       0.9                                                                         0.9


       0.8                                                                         0.8


       0.7                                                                         0.7
          0.5                 1                 1.5                  2                0.5          1                 1.5        2



                                  (a) Fluid 1                                                          (b) Fluid 2

                Figure 11. Sedimentation velocity as a function of Wi for increasing Λ for Fluid 1 and Fluid 2.

      This figure shows that the sedimentation velocity is indeed decreasing with increasing
shear Weissenberg number. This effect is much more pronounced in Fluid 1 than in Fluid 2.
Furthermore, the sedimentation velocity is higher in Fluid 2 than in Fluid 1, and for small Wi,
the sedimentation velocity is almost equal to the sedimentation velocity of a particle in a Newtonian
fluid in Fluid 1, whereas it is higher than the Newtonian velocity in Fluid 2. This confirms that shear
thinning is increasing the sedimentation velocity of a falling particle, also decreasing the effect of
elasticity that causes the sedimentation velocity to decrease for higher Wi, as was also found in the
literature [10,11]. The contour plots of the sedimentation velocity for both fluids are shown in Figure 12.

        2                                                                           2                                          1.4
                                                                   0.94

                                                                   0.92
                                                                                                                               1.35
                                                                   0.9

                                                                   0.88                                                        1.3
      1.5                                                                         1.5
                                                                   0.86

                                                                   0.84                                                        1.25

                                                                   0.82

        1                                                                           1                                          1.2
                                                                   0.8

                                                                   0.78
                                                                                                                               1.15
                                                                   0.76

                                                                   0.74
                                                                                                                               1.1
      0.5                                                                         0.5
         0.5              1               1.5             2                          0.5      1                1.5         2



                                  (a) Fluid 1                                                          (b) Fluid 2

      Figure 12. Contour plots of the sedimentation velocity of Fluid 1 and Fluid 2. Markers x indicate the
      data points; between these points, the data are interpolated using the MATLAB R function contourf.
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                         16 of 20



     The contour plots also clearly show different behavior for the two fluids. For Fluid 1,
the sedimentation velocity clearly decreases with increasing Wi, while for Fluid 2, the sedimentation
velocity seems almost independent of Wi for small Λ, whereas the effect of decreasing velocity for
increasing Wi for higher Λ is much less pronounced as for Fluid 1. For Fluid 2, the effect of increasing
Λ is also bigger than for Fluid 1.

5. Conclusions
      A numerical model was developed in order to investigate numerically the influence of shear and
sedimentation Weissenberg number on the migration and sedimentation of a particle in a Couette flow
device. DEVSS-G and the log-conformation representation are used for numerical stability. To reduce
computational costs, only a part of the Couette flow device is modeled. Periodic boundary conditions
are applied at the symmetry planes, using vector and tensor rotations. We believe that this domain
excludes the effect of particle–particle interactions. In order to reduce the amount of remeshing steps,
the mesh moves as a rigid body with the particle in the θ- and z-direction, while it still deforms due to
the movement of the particle in the r-direction. This is done using the ALE method.
      The particle was initially placed at different positions close to the inner cylinder of the device.
First, the influence of the two separate complex flows was investigated by either applying no velocity
Uw on the outer cylinder, and therefore Wi = 0, or applying no downward force on the particle,
and therefore Λ = 0. The suspending fluid is a Giesekus fluid.
      First, the migration velocity of a falling particle without applying a shear flow was studied. It was
found that the migration velocity was almost zero when the particle was far away from the inner
cylinder. When the particle approached the inner cylinder, the particle migrated towards it, and this
migration velocity was increased by increasing Λ. At a certain position, the particle got so close to the
inner cylinder that the mobility of the particle in the r-direction was drastically decreased, decreasing
the migration velocity. Secondly, the migration of a particle in a Couette flow, without sedimentation,
was studied. Here, it was found that for small values of Wi, there was no migration. When Wi was
increased, the particle started to migrate towards the inner cylinder when it was initially placed close
to it. When the particle was initially positioned further away from the cylinder, the particle migrated
away from it. When the two flows were combined, it was found that combining the two complex flows
leads to a higher migration velocity than the sum of the migration velocities of the two separate flows.
This effect was more pronounced for higher Weissenberg numbers, indicating that for high values of
Λ and Wi, the coupling of the two flows becomes non-linear. The trace of the conformation tensor
was found to be asymmetric around the particle when the particle was in close proximity of the inner
cylinder. The trace of the conformation is higher at the side of the particle close to the inner cylinder,
indicating that the polymers are more stretched here.
      To study the influence of shear and sedimentation Weissenberg number on the sedimentation
of a particle, two different sets of material parameters were used, where Fluid 2 is much more shear
thinning than Fluid 1 and fluid 1 has a large β, mimicking a Boger fluid. It was confirmed that shear
thinning increases the sedimentation velocity of the particle. Furthermore, it was found that the
sedimentation velocity indeed decreases for increasing Wi in Fluid 1, whereas this effect was less
pronounced for Fluid 2. For small values of Λ, this effect was not seen at all for Fluid 2, indicating that
shear thinning opposes the effect of elasticity.

Author Contributions: This study was a part of the graduation project of M.M.A.S. She was responsible for
developing the computational model and for performing the simulations and data analysis. She was supervised
by N.O.J., who also contributed to the interpretation of the results. N.O.J., M.A.H. and P.D.A. contributed to the
critical revision of the article.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                    17 of 20



Appendix A. Periodic Boundary Condition Velocity
      A schematic overview of the domain in 2D is shown in Figure A1. The domain is shown in 2D for
clarity, because the velocity in the z-direction does not undergo a rotation. The z-component is now
the vector pointing into the paper.




                                        er     eθ                           er
                                         S2
                                                                 S4         φ
                                                    u                            eθ

                                                                      u0


                           ey                            φ


                      ez           ex
                     Figure A1. Schematic overview of a 2D curve with periodic boundary conditions.

     To obtain the velocity components on surface S2 equal to the velocity components on S4 , u2 has to
be rotated over a counterclockwise angle φ, since surface S4 is rotated over an angle φ with respect to
surface S2 . The rotation of a vector can be performed by taking the dot product with a tensor R, which
rotates the vector in a constant coordinate system. After applying the rotation, the velocity on surface
S2 equals the velocity on S4 . In a Cartesian coordinate system (e x , ey , ez ), the rotation is expressed
as follows:                                                         
                                  Ux          cos φ − sin φ 0        Ux0
                                Uy  =  sin φ      cos φ 0  Uy0  .                                (A1)
                                                                    
                                  Uz            0      0      1      Uz0

      Using Equation (A1), Ux , Uy , and Uz on surface S4 can be expressed as follows:

                                              Ux = Ux0 cos φ − Uy0 sin φ,                               (A2)
                                              Uy = Ux0 sin φ + Uy0 cos φ,                               (A3)
                                                      Uz = Uz0 .                                        (A4)

     The same approach can be used to calculate the traction components on surfaces S4 and S2 ,
in order to obey the periodic boundary conditions.

Appendix B. Periodic Boundary Condition Conformation Tensor

Appendix B.1. Tensor Rotation
     Periodic boundary conditions for the conformation tensor are needed on surfaces S2 and S4 , since
only a part of the Couette flow device is modeled. This is done following the same principle as for the
periodic boundary conditions for the velocity, only now a tensor rotation has to be performed instead
of a vector rotation. The formula to rotate a tensor A can be derived as follows:
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                               18 of 20



     The rotation of an arbitrary vector u0 can be performed by taking the product of a tensor that
performs a rotation with this vector. Now, the rotated vector u of u0 is obtained:

                                                      u = R · u0 ,                                                 (A5)

where R is a tensor that performs a rotation in a constant coordinate system. Furthermore, the inner
product of a rotated tensor A with a rotated vector x gives a rotated vector b, and the same thing holds
for the unrotated tensor and vectors:

                                                       A·x = b                                                     (A6)
                                                       0    0     0
                                                     A ·x =b.                                                      (A7)

      If these equations are combined with Equation (A5), the following can be obtained:

                                                 A · R · x0 = R · b0 .                                             (A8)

      Equation (A8) can be multiplied with R−1 , (R−1 · R = I), to obtain:

                                                R −1 · A · R · x 0 = b 0 .                                         (A9)

     Equation (A9) combined with Equation (A7) states that A0 = R−1 · A · R. If A0 = R−1 · A · R is
pre-multiplied with R and post-multiplied with R−1 , we obtain: R · A0 · R−1 = R · R−1 · A · R · R−1 .
Invoking that R is an orthogonal tensor (R T = R−1 ), the rotation of tensor A0 to tensor A can be
performed as follows:
                                 A = R · A 0 · R −1 = R · A 0 · R T .                          (A10)

Appendix B.2. Conformation Tensor
     Periodic boundary conditions for the conformation tensor are applied to surfaces S2 and S4 .
This means that the components c xx , c xy , c xz , cyx , cyy , cyz , czx , czy , and czz on the inflow nodes of
surfaces S2 and S4 have to be equal to the components c0xx , c0xy , c0xz , c0yx , c0yy , c0yz , c0zx , c0zy , and c0zz on
the outflow nodes of surfaces S2 and S4 , but rotated. Since the surface S2 is rotated over an angle
φ compared to surface S4 , the components of c0 on the inflow nodes have to be rotated over the
same angle φ. Using the result of Equation (A10), this gives the following equation for rotating the
conformation tensor c0 :

                                                         c0xx c0xy c0xz
                                                                                                 
        c xx c xy c xz      cos φ − sin φ 0                                        cos φ   sin φ 0
       cyx cyy cyz  =  sin φ     cos φ 0  c0yx c0yy c0yz  − sin φ cos φ 0 .                               (A11)
                                                                                                 
        czx czy czz           0       0         1          0     0
                                                         czx czy czz    0            0       0        1

      The equations for the tensor components can be expressed using Equation (A11):

                       c xx = (c0xx cos φ − c0yx sin φ) cos φ − sin φ(c0xy cos φ − c0yy sin φ)                   (A12)
                       c xy = (c0xx cos φ + c0yx sin φ) sin φ + cos φ(c0xy cos φ − c0yy sin φ)                   (A13)
                                            c xz = c0xz cos φ − c0yz sin φ                                       (A14)

                       cyx = (c0xx sin φ + c0yx cos φ) cos φ − sin φ(c0xy sin φ + c0yy cos φ)                    (A15)
                       cyy = (c0xx sin φ + c0yx cos φ) sin φ + cos φ(c0xy sin φ + c0yy cos φ)                    (A16)
                                             cyz = c0xz sin φ + c0yz cos φ                                       (A17)
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                                19 of 20



                                             czx = c0zx cos φ − c0zy sin φ                                        (A18)
                                             czy = c0zx sin φ + c0zy cos φ                                        (A19)
                                                      czz = c0zz                                                  (A20)

     Since, c xy = cyx , c xz = czx , and cyz = czy , it can be concluded that the conformation tensor
is symmetric.

References
1.    Kim, Y.; Yoo, J. Three-dimensional focusing of red blood cells in microchannel flows for bio-sensing
      applications. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2009, 24, 3677–3682. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Economides, M.; Nolte, K. Reservoir Stimulation; Prentice Hall: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 1989.
3.    Singh, P.; Joseph, D. Sedimentation of a sphere near a vertical wall in an Oldroyd-B fluid. J. Non-Newton.
      Fluid Mech. 2000, 94, 179–203. [CrossRef]
4.    D’Avino, G.; Tuccillo, T.; Maffettone, P.; Greco, F.; Hulsen, M. Numerical simulations of particle migration in
      a viscoelastic fluid subjected to shear flow. Comput. Fluids 2010, 39, 709–721. [CrossRef]
5.    D’Avino, G.; Snijkers, F.; Pasquino, R.; Hulsen, M.; Greco, F.; Maffettone, P.; Vermant, J. Migration of a sphere
      suspended in viscoelastic liquids in Couette flow: Experiments and simulations. Rheol. Acta 2012, 51, 215–234.
      [CrossRef]
6.    Chilcott, M.; Rallison, J. Creeping flow of dilute polymer solutions past cylinders and spheres. J. Non-Newton.
      Fluid Mech. 1988, 29, 381–432. [CrossRef]
7.    Harlen, O.; Rallison, J.; Chilcott, M. High-Deborah-number flows of dilute polymer solutions. J. Non-Newton.
      Fluid Mech. 1990, 34, 319–349. [CrossRef]
8.    Arigo, M.; Rajagopalan, D.; Shapley, N.; McKinley, G. The sedimentation of a sphere through an elastic fluid.
      Part 1. Steady motion. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 1995, 60, 225–27. [CrossRef]
9.    D’Avino, G.; Maffettone, P. Particle dynamics in viscoelastic liquids. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 2015, 215, 80–104.
      [CrossRef]
10.   Van den Brule, B.; Gheissary, G. Effects of fluid elasticity on the static and dynamic settling of a spherical
      particle. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 1993, 49, 123–132. [CrossRef]
11.   Padhy, S.; Rodriguez, M.; Shaqfeh, E.; Iaccarino, G.; Morris, J.; Tonmakayakul, N. The effect of shear thinning
      and walls on the sedimentation of a sphere in an elastic fluid under orthogonal shear. J. Non-Newton.
      Fluid Mech. 2013, 201, 120–129. [CrossRef]
12.   Padhy, S.; Shaqfeh, E.; Iaccarino, G.; Morris, J.; Tonmakayakul, N. Simulations of a sphere sedimenting in
      a viscoelastic fluid with cross shear flow. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 2013, 197, 48–60. [CrossRef]
13.   Murch, W.; Krishnan, S.; Shaqfeh, E.; Iaccarino, G. Growth of viscoelastic wings and the reduction of particle
      mobility in a viscoelastic shear flow. Phys. Rev. Fluids 2017, 2, 103302. [CrossRef]
14.   Giesekus, H. A simple constitutive equation for polymer fluids based on the concept of
      deformation-dependent tensorial mobility. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 1982, 11, 69–109. [CrossRef]
15.   Hu, H.; Patankar, N.; Zhu, M. Direct numerical simulations of fluid-solid systems using the arbitrary
      Lagrangian-Eulerian technique. J. Comput. Phys. 2001, 169, 427–462. [CrossRef]
16.   Hulsen, M.; Fattal, R.; Kupferman, R. Flow of viscoelastic fluids past a cylinder at high Weissenberg number:
      Stabilized simulations using matrix logarithms. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 2005, 127, 27–39. [CrossRef]
17.   Bogaerds, A.; Grillet, A.; Peters, G.; Baaijens, F. Stability analysis of polymer shear flows using the extended
      pom-pom constitutive equations. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 2002, 108, 187–208. [CrossRef]
18.   Glowinski, R.; Pan, T.; Hesla, T.; Joseph, D. A distributed Lagrange multiplier/fictitious domain method for
      particulate flows. Int. J. Multiph. Flow 1999, 25, 755–794. [CrossRef]
19.   Geuzaine, C.; Remacle, J. Gmsh: A 3D finite element mesh generator with built-in pre- and post-processing
      facilities. Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 2009, 79, 1–24. [CrossRef]
20.   Jaensson, N.; Hulsen, M.; Anderson, P. Stokes-Cahn-Hilliard formulations and simulations of two-phase
      flows with suspended rigid particles. Comput. Fluids 2015, 111, 1–17. [CrossRef]
21.   Van der Zanden, J.; Hulsen, M. Mathematical and physical requirements for successful computations with
      viscoelastic fluid models. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 1988, 29, 93–117. [CrossRef]
Fluids 2019, 4, 25                                                                                          20 of 20



22.   Renardy, M. Inflow boundary conditions for steady flows of viscoelastic fluids with differential constitutive
      laws. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 1988, 18, 445–454.
23.   D’Avino, G.; Hulsen, M. Decoupled second-order transient schemes for the flow of viscoelastic fluids
      without a viscous solvent contribution. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 2010, 165, 1602–1612. [CrossRef]
24.   Snijkers, F.; D’Avino, G.; Maffettone, P.; Greco, F.; Hulsen, M.; Vermant, J. Effect of viscoelasticity on the
      rotation of a sphere in shear flow. J. Non-Newton. Fluid Mech. 2011, 166, 363–372. [CrossRef]

                         c 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                        article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                        (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
