Glossary

 Conditional probability distribution   Conditional probability distribution π(y|x) pro-
                                        vides the plausibility of proposition y, given
                                        proposition x.
 Correlation                            A general term for the dependence between
                                        pairs of random variables.
 Correlation coefficient                A measure for the strength of the dependence
                                        between pairs of random variables.
 Covariance                             A measure that shows how two random variables
                                        depend on each other.
 Covariance matrix                      A symmetric matrix in which the off-diagonal
                                        elements are covariances of pairs of random vari-
                                        ables and the diagonal elements are variances of
                                        random variables.
 Credible interval (region)             An interval (or a region in the multivariate case)
                                        of a distribution in which it is believed that one
                                        or more random variables (parameters in this
                                        study) lie with a certain probability.
 Dependence and independence            Two events are statistically independent if the
                                        occurrence of one has no influence on the
                                        probability of the occurrence of the other one
                                        (i.e. π(x) = π(x|y)). They are dependent if
                                        the occurrence of one has an influence on the
                                        probability of the occurrence of the other one
                                        (i.e. π(x) 6= π(x|y)).
 Event                                  A set of outcomes of an experiment.
 Joint distribution                     A multivariate distribution.
 Laplace approximation                  An approximation of a distribution with a Gaus-
                                        sian distribution centred at the MAP.
 Likelihood function                    If the conditional probability distribution π(y|x)
                                        is regarded as a function of x for given fixed y,
                                        the function is called a likelihood function. The
                                        likelihood describes the plausibility of a param-
                                        eter, given observations.
 Marginal distribution                  A probability distribution as a function of a sin-
                                        gle variable or a combination of subsets of vari-
                                        ables associated with a multivariate distribution
                                        (e.g. π(x), π(y), π(x, y), π(x, z) and π(y, z), for
                                        joint distribution π(x, y, z)). A marginal distri-
                                        bution is obtained by integrating a multivariate
                                        distribution over one or more (but not all) other
                                        variables.




                                                      1
Markov chain                                   A stochastic model to describe a sequence of
                                               events in which the probability of each event
                                               only depends on the previous event.
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods        A set of techniques to draw samples (i.e. simu-
                                               late observations) from probability distributions
                                               by the construction of a Markov chain.
Maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) point   A point at which the posterior distribution is
                                               (globally) maximum.
Mean (expected value)                          A measure for the central value of the underly-
                                               ing distribution.
Multivariate distribution                      A probability distribution of two or more ran-
                                               dom variables.
Point estimate                                 A scalar that measures a feature of a population,
                                               e.g. the mean value, the MAP point.
Population                                     The total set of all possible observations that
                                               can be made.
Posterior distribution (posterior)             The probability distribution that describes one’s
                                               knowledge about a random variable (parame-
                                               ter in this study) after obtaining new measure-
                                               ments.
Posterior predictive distribution (PPD)        The distribution of unobserved measurements
                                               (observations), given the measured (observed)
                                               data.
Prior distribution (prior)                     The probability distribution that describes one’s
                                               a-priori knowledge about a random variable (pa-
                                               rameter in this study).
Probability                                    The likelihood (or plausibility) that a certain
                                               event occurs.
Probability density function (PDF)             The equation that describes a continuous prob-
                                               ability distribution.
Probability distribution                       A function that provides the probabilities of the
                                               occurrence of the possible outcomes of an exper-
                                               iment.
Random sample                                  A randomly chosen sample.
Random variable                                A variable of which the value depends on the
                                               outcome of a random experiment.
Realisation                                    The value that a random variable takes or the
                                               outcome of an experiment after its occurrence.
Sample                                         A set of observations from a population with the
                                               purpose of investigating particular properties of
                                               the population.
Standard deviation                             A measure for the possible deviation of a ran-
                                               dom variable from its mean. Large standard de-
                                               viations indicate large possible differences; and
                                               vice versa.




                                                2
Validation point      A measurement (observation) used to assess the
                      quality of a prediction based on the identified
                      parameters, that is not used for the identifica-
                      tion itself.
Variance              The standard deviation squared.




  More definitions on statistical concepts can be found in [1] and [2].


                                                              3
       A tutorial on Bayesian inference to identify material parameters in solid
                                      mechanics

                         H. Rappela,b , L.A.A. Beexa , J.S. Halea , L. Noelsb , S.P.A. Bordasa,c,∗
      a Institute of Computational Engineering, Faculty of Science, Technology and Communication, University of Luxembourg,

                         Maison du Nombre, 6, Avenue de la Fonte, 4364, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
        b Computational & Multiscale Mechanics of Materials (CM3), Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering,

                    University of Liège, Quartier Polytech 1, Allée de la Découverte 9, B-4000 Liège, Belgium.
            c School of Engineering, Cardiff University, Queen’s Buildings, The Parade, Cardiff CF243AA, Wales, UK.




     Abstract
     The aim of this contribution is to explain in a straightforward manner how Bayesian inference can be used to
     identify material parameters of material models for solids. Bayesian approaches have already been used for
     this purpose, but most of the literature is not necessarily easy to understand for those new to the field. The
     reason for this is that most literature focuses either on complex statistical and machine learning concepts
     and/or on relatively complex mechanical models. In order to introduce the approach as gently as possible,
     we only focus on stress-strain measurements coming from uniaxial tensile tests and we only treat elastic and
     elastoplastic material models. Furthermore, the stress-strain measurements are created artificially in order to
     allow a one-to-one comparison between the true parameter values and the identified parameter distributions.
     Keywords: Bayesian inference, Bayes’ theorem, stochastic identification, statistical identification,
     parameter identification, elastoplasticity, plasticity


     1. Introduction

         The most commonly used approach to identify parameters of mechanical descriptions for solid materials is
     to formulate an error function that measures the difference between the model response and the experimental
     data [3]. This error function is then minimised with respect to the material parameters in order to determine
5    their most suitable values. Such an approach provides a deterministic estimate of parameter values, unable
     to account for the unavoidable uncertainties of each parameter associated with experimental observations.
         An alternative, and rather different approach is to use Bayesian inference (BI). Using Bayes’ theorem,
     a probability density function (PDF), the so-called posterior distribution (or the posterior for short) can
     be formulated as a function of the material parameters of interest. Subsequently, the PDF is analysed to
10   determine relevant summaries, such as the mean of the material parameters, the material properties at
     which the PDF is maximum (called the ‘maximum-a-posteriori-probability’ point, or MAP for short) and
     the covariance matrix (i.e. a matrix that measures the correlation between the parameters). The PDF can
     only be explored analytically for a limited number of straightforward cases. Hence, numerical methods are
     commonly employed, e.g. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques [4–7]. An alternative is to first
15   approximate the PDF (e.g. by a Laplace approximation) and then determine the statistical summaries of
     the approximated distribution (e.g. mean, MAP point and covariance matrix) [8, 9].
         In contrast to deterministic identification approaches, approaches using BI can quite straightforwardly
     incorporate several uncertainty sources, such as the noises coming from different experimental devices, as
     well as the uncertainty caused by the fact that the model cannot perfectly capture reality (i.e. the model
20   uncertainty) [10]. In addition, all parameter values come with their individual uncertainty, that is also


       ∗ Corresponding author

        Email address: stephane.bordas@alum.northwestern.edu (S.P.A. Bordas)


                                                                  4
     measured in terms of the parameter values. This is in contrast to conventional deterministic identification
     approach which come with one residual as a measure for the full set of parameters, which is obviously
     not expressed in terms of the parameters themselves. Additionally, BI provides an intrinsic statistical
     regularisation which makes inverse problems with limited observations solvable [11]. On the other hand,
25   applying Bayes’ theorem for material parameter identification does require the measurement noise to be
     known, i.e. the noise distributions and their parameters must be established. One must note that the noise
     distribution and its parameter values can be treated as unknown parameters that need to be identified
     and hence, they appear in the posterior. The numerical techniques to analyse the posterior PDFs may
     furthermore need careful attention.
30       The developments of BI in the field of parameter identification for mechanical models started with the
     identification of elastic constants. Isenberg [12] proposed a Bayesian approach for the identification of
     elastic parameters in 1979. Various researchers subsequently used the framework to identify elastic material
     parameters based on dynamic responses [8, 13, 14]. Lai and Ip [15] used BI to identify the elastic properties
     of a thin composite plate. Daghia et al. [16] used the Bayesian framework for the identification of the elastic
35   constants of thick laminated composite plates in a dynamical setting. Koutsourelakis [17] used Bayesian
     inference to identify spatially varying elastic material parameters. In 2010, Gogu et al. [3] presented an
     introduction in the Bayesian approach for the identification of elastic constants, and compared the results
     with those of a deterministic identification approach. The influence of the prior distributions was however
     not systematically studied. In another study, Gogu et al. [18] used a Bayesian framework to identify elastic
40   constants in multi-directional laminates.
         BI is also used for the parameter identification of nonlinear constitutive models. Muto and Beck [19] and
     Liu and Au [20] applied the approach to hysteretic models, whereas Fitzenz et al. [21] used BI to identify
     parameters of a creep model of quartz. Most [22] used a Bayesian updating procedure for the parameter
     identification of an elastoplastic model without hardening (perfect plasticity). Rosić et al. [23] used linear
45   Bayesian updating via polynomial chaos expansion for an elastoplastic system. BI is also employed for the
     identification of viscoelastic material parameters in [24, 25].
         Another study that uses Bayes’ theorem to identify material parameters is the work of Nichols et al. [26].
     They employed the theorem to identify the nonlinear stiffness of a dynamic system. Furthermore, Nichols
     et al. [26] used the method to find the location, size and depth of delamination in a composite beam.
50   Abhinav and Manohar [27] used BI to characterise the dynamic parameters of a structural system with
     geometrical nonlinearities. The approach is also employed to assess the quality of different models with
     respect to measured data (i.e. model selection): e.g. hyperelastic constitutive models for soft tissue [28],
     phenomenological models for tumour growth [29], models for damage progression in composites due to
     fatigue [30] and fatigue models for metals [31]. Sarkar et al. [32] used the Bayesian method to identify
55   thermodynamical parameters of cementitious materials. BI is also used in the fields of heat transfer and
     fluid mechanics for inverse problems [5, 33].
         Bayesian inference relies on concepts that may be complex to grasp for those who are only familiar with
     deterministic identification methods. The primary objective of this contribution is to show how Bayesian
     inference can be applied for the stochastic identification of material parameters. We focus on elastoplastic
60   material models in this contribution for two reasons: (1) they are widely used in the field of mechanics, and
     (2) the family of elastoplastic material models contains both simple (linear elasticity) and more complex,
     nonlinear, C0 -continuous descriptions (elastoplasticity with nonlinear hardening). Our contribution focuses
     on results of uniaxial tensile tests in order to be as straightforward as possible. In addition to introducing the
     general idea of identification approaches based on BI as gently as possible (to our abilities), we also discuss
65   some more complex extensions, such as not only incorporating the error in the stress, but also incorporating
     the error in the strain and the uncertainty of the model. Those extensions are not discussed in much detail,
     but references to other works are included.
         The structure of this article is as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses the employed material models in
     this contribution. Section 3 discusses the theoretical fundaments behind Bayes’ theorem. Section 3 also
70   describes a Bayesian approach for the stochastic identification of elastoplastic material parameters, if only
     the stress measurements include stochastic errors. In Section 4, MCMC methods as the numerical techniques



                                                             5
      to analyse the posterior distribution are explained. In this section, we also explain the posterior predictive
      distribution (PPD) as an approach for predicting unobserved measurements. In Section 5, a considerable
      number of results are presented. In Section 6, some advanced concepts, such as incorporating the error in
 75   the strain and the model uncertainty, are discussed. We also briefly discuss how the approach differs if a
      viscoelastic material model is used instead. In Section 7, conclusions are presented.

      Remark 1. As mentioned before, we only consider stress-strain data coming from uniaxial tensile tests in
      this contribution. As the force is measured in tensile tests, the measured stress and its error is assumed to be
      proportional to the measured force and its error (the parameters of its distribution are to be identified using
 80   separate calibration experiments). Strain measurements are commonly based either on the clamp displacement
      or determined using digital image correlation (DIC). In both cases, the parameters of the error distribution
      of the strain can be determined using calibration experiments.

      Remark 2. Throughout this paper bold letters and symbols denote vectors and matrices. Capitals further-
      more denote random variables.


 85   2. Material models

          In this contribution, BI is developed to identify the parameters of four one-dimensional material models:
      linear elasticity, linear elasticity with perfect plasticity, linear elasticity with linear hardening and linear
      elasticity with nonlinear hardening. Hardening is considered to be isotropic and associative. For each model,
      the identification is based on the results of monotonic uniaxial tensile tests. Below, material responses are
 90   given for monotonic tensile loading.

      2.1. Linear elasticity
         The linear elastic model assumes a linear relationship between the stress and the strains. In the case of
      uniaxial tension/compression, this writes:

                                                         σ(, x) = E,                                              (1)
      where σ denotes the stress,  the strain, x the material parameter vector (here x = E) and E the Young’s
 95   modulus.

      2.2. Linear elasticity-perfect plasticity
          The linear elastic-perfectly plastic model neglects the effect of work hardening, assuming that purely
      plastic deformation occurs when the stress reaches its yield value. The total strain () in this contribution
      is additively split into an elastic part, e , and a plastic part, p :

                                                           = e + p ,                                             (2)
100   and the stress is defined as a function of the elastic strain, e :

                                                  σ(, x) = Ee = E( − p ).                                       (3)
         The yield condition at which plastic yielding occurs, is written as:

                                                    f (σ) = |σ| − σy0 ≤ 0,                                          (4)
                                                                                                          T
      where σy0 denotes the initial yield stress and f the yield function. Consequently, x = E       σy0        .
         The flow rule for the plastic strain is furthermore expressed as:
                                                                     ∂f
                                                          ˙p = α̇      ,                                           (5)
                                                                     ∂σ


                                                               6
                σ                                                                σ




                                                                                                  HE
                                                                                                 1 H+E
              σy0




                                                                               σy0
                        E                                                                E
                    1                                                               1
                        σy0                                                              σy0                     
                         E                                                                E
                                      (a)     σ                                                    (b)
                                            σy0




                                                                           E
                                                                       1
                                                      E
                                                  1                                          
                                                      σy0
                                                       E
                                                              p        e
                                                                        (c)

      Figure 1: The stress-strain response of (a) linear elastic-perfectly plastic model, (b) linear elastic-linear hardening model and
      (c) linear elastic-nonlinear hardening model during monotonic tension.



      where α denotes the cumulative plastic strain. Finally, the Kuhn-Tucker conditions [34] ensure that dissipa-
105   tion is irreversible:

                                                      α̇ ≥ 0,      f (σ) ≤ 0, α̇f (σ) = 0.                                         (6)
         The stress-strain response of the linear elastic-perfectly plastic model during monotonic tension can be
      written as:
                                                        (
                                                                        σ
                                                          E     if  ≤ Ey0
                                              σ(, x) =                 σy0 .                                 (7)
                                                          σy0 if  > E
      Using the Heaviside step function (h(·)), Eq. (7) can alternatively be expressed as:
                                                                 
                                                           σy0               σy0 
                                  σ(, x) = E 1 − h  −            + σy0 h  −       ,                                            (8)
                                                             E                   E
      Fig. 1(a) presents this response graphically.

110   2.3. Linear elasticity-linear hardening
          The linear elastic-linear hardening model is identical to the linear elastic-perfectly plastic model, except
      for the yield function, which writes:

                                                          f (σ) = |σ| − σy0 − Hα ≤ 0,                                              (9)



                                                                           7
                                                                     T
      where H denotes the plastic modulus. Hence, x = E σy0 H .
         Consequently, the stress-strain response of the model during monotonic tension writes:
                                                    (
                                                                         σ
                                                      E          if  ≤ Ey0
                                          σ(, x) =                      σy0 ,                                 (10)
                                                      σy0 + Hp if  > E
115   which can again be expressed using the Heaviside step function:
                                                                           
                                             σy0               HE     σy0       σy0 
                      σ(, x) = E 1 − h  −         + σy0 +          −        h −       .                   (11)
                                               E                H +E      E           E
      Fig. 1(b) shows this response graphically.

      2.4. Linear elasticity-nonlinear hardening
        The linear elastic-nonlinear hardening model also only differs from the linear elastic-perfectly plastic
      model through the yield function, which writes:

                                              f (σ) = |σ| − σy0 − Hαn ≤ 0,                                     (12)
                                                                                              T
120   where n is an additional plastic material parameter and hence, x = E σy0 H           n        .
         For monotonic uniaxial tension, the stress-strain response can be written as:
                                                    (
                                                                          σ
                                                     E            if  ≤ Ey0
                                          σ(, x) =                       σ   ,                                (13)
                                                     σy0 + Hnp if  > Ey0
      or using the Heaviside step function:
                                                                          
                                             σy0                σ(, x) n     σy0 
                       σ(, x) = E 1 − h  −        + σy0 + H  −            h −       .                     (14)
                                               E                     E              E
      Fig. 1(c) shows this stress-strain response.
         It is worth noting that Eq. (14) is an implicit function of the stress (σ(, x) appears both on the left
125   hand side and right hand side of Eq. (14) and cannot analytically be determined if  is known). This is in
      contrast to the stress-strain expressions of the previous material models for monotonic tension (Eqs. (1), (8)
      and (11)), which are all explicit functions (i.e. σ(, x) can analytically be computed when one has ).


      3. Bayesian inference

      3.1. Concepts
130      We start by considering random events A and B, and the discrete probabilities of each event: P(a) and
      P(b). The probability that events A and B both occur, is given by the joint probability, P(a, b), which can
      be expanded as:

                                           P(a, b) = P(a|b)P(b) = P(b|a)P(a),                                  (15)
      where P(a|b) and P(b|a) are conditional probabilities. Conditional probability P(a|b) expresses the proba-
      bility that event A occurs, if it is certain that event B occurs. Using Eq. (15), the simplest form of Bayes’
135   theorem can be written as:

                                                              P(a)P(b|a)
                                                   P(a|b) =              .                                     (16)
                                                                 P(b)




                                                              8
         If one regards two continuous random variables X ∈ Rnp and Y ∈ Rnm , instead of discrete variables,
      where X denotes a random vector with np unknown parameters and Y a random vector with nm measure-
      ments, Eq. (16) can be rewritten in terms of the following probability distribution functions (where π denotes
      a PDF):

                                                                π(x)π(y|x)
                                                   π(x|y) =                ,                                       (17)
                                                                   π(y)
140   where π(x), π(y|x) and π(x|y) are referred to as the prior distribution (i.e. the PDF that includes one’s
      prior knowledge), the likelihood function (i.e. the PDF of the observed data y, given unknown parameters
      x) and the posterior distribution (i.e. the PDF of the unknown parameters x, given the observations y),
      respectively.
          Using the law of total probabilities [35] which relates the marginal probabilities (π(x) and π(y)) to the
145   conditional probabilities (π(y|x)), the denominator in Eq. (17) can be written as:
                                                        Z
                                                π(y) =       π(x)π(y|x)dx.                                     (18)
                                                          Rnp

      Since the data (y) is already measured, the denominator in Eq. (17) is a positive constant number, C ∈ R+ .
      This constant number can be regarded as a normalisation factor that ensures that the integral of the posterior
      (π(x|y)) over x equals 1:
                                                              1
                                                  π(x|y) =      π(x)π(y|x).                                        (19)
                                                              C
      Hence, one can rewrite Eq. (19) as:

                                                   π(x|y) ∝ π(x)π(y|x).                                            (20)
150   Note that the statistical summaries of the posterior distribution (i.e. the mean, the MAP point and the
      covariance matrix) do not depend on the absolute posterior, but only on its shape.
          In order to obtain the posterior in Eq. (20) (i.e. the PDF of the vector of unknown parameters, given the
      observations π(x|y)), the likelihood function (π(y|x)) and the prior (π(x)) need to be formulated. First, the
      likelihood function is considered.
155       In order to construct the likelihood function, a noise model has to be formulated and a noise distribution
      (πnoise ) has to be determined. For the moment, we assume that the noise distribution is known (including its
      parameters). The noise model used in this study is additive, which is frequently employed, amongst others
      in [11, 16]. The additive noise model can be written as follows:

                                                       Y = f(X) + Ω,                                               (21)
      where X ∈ Rnp denotes again the vector with the unknown material parameters, Y ∈ Rnm the vector with
160   the measured data and Ω ∈ Rnm the noise vector. f : Rnp → Rnm denotes the material description and is
      a function of the unknown material parameters (X). Given realisations X = x and Ω = ω, and assuming
      that the parameters (X) and the error (Ω) are statistically independent, the likelihood function reads:

                                                 π(y|x) = πnoise (y − f(x)),                                       (22)
      where πnoise (ω) is the PDF of the noise (which is assumed to be identified based on separate calibration
      experiments, see Subsection 5.1). Substitution of Eq. (22) in Eq. (20) yields:

                                               π(x|y) ∝ π(x)πnoise (y − f(x)).                                     (23)
165       A critical aspect of the Bayesian framework is the selection of the prior distribution (π(x)) [11] in which a-
      priori knowledge about the parameters is translated in terms of a PDF. The influence of the prior distribution
      diminishes if the number of observation increases [36], which is considered in more detail in Section 5.


                                                                9
          Once the posterior is formulated (Eq. (23)), the mean parameter values, MAP parameter values and the
      covariance matrix can be extracted from it. We will use Markov chain Monte Carlo methods for this, since
170   they are the most commonly employed approaches to do so. These techniques are discussed in Subsection
      4.1. Only for linear elasticity, we analytically analyse the posterior.
      Remark 3. The parameters of the noise distribution can also be treated as unknown parameters that need to
      be identified. In that case, they appear as variables in the posterior, together with the material parameters.
      For tensile testers in well-controlled environments however, it is fair to say that the noise distribution and
175   its parameters can be identified using a separate calibration process (see subsection 5.1).

      3.2. Application to the material responses during monotonic uniaxial tension
          In this subsection, we apply the aforementioned Bayesian framework to the four material descriptions
      for monotonic uniaxial tension. Effectively, this means that we replace model f(x) in Eqs. (21) and (23) by
      the four material responses σ(, x). We will see however that the resulting posterior distribution for linear
180   elasticity can be analysed analytically, but that the posteriors for the other three material descriptions need
      to be analysed numerically. This is because all elastoplastic descriptions are only C0 -continuous. On top of
      that, the description of the elastoplastic model with nonlinear hardening is implicit.

      3.2.1. Linear elasticity
          The only unknown material parameter in the linear elastic model is the Young’s modulus (E). Based on
185   Section 3, the additive noise model for a single stress measurement can be written as follows:

                                                       Y = E + Ω,                                              (24)
      where Y denotes the measured stress and Ω denotes the random variable representing the noise in the stress
      measurement. We consider the noise distribution to be normal (Gaussian) and hence, it can be written as:

                                                             1            ω2 
                                          πnoise (ω) = √            exp − 2      .                              (25)
                                                           2πsnoise      2snoise
      Using Eq. (22), the likelihood function for a single stress measurement can now be expressed as:

                                                                  1          (y − E)2 
                                π(y|E) = πnoise (y − E) = √             exp −            .                     (26)
                                                                2πsnoise        2s2noise
      Substitution of Eq. (26) in Eq. (23) then yields the following expression for the posterior:
                                                             (y − E)2 
                                            π(E|y) ∝ π(E)exp −            .                                     (27)
                                                                2s2noise
190      If we use a prior in the form of a modified normal distribution as follows:
                                               (              2
                                                                 
                                                  exp − (E−E)
                                                            2
                                                          2sE
                                                                     if E ≥ 0
                                        π(E) ∝                                   ,                              (28)
                                                  0                  otherwise
      the posterior distribution for a single stress measurement reads:
                                                   h        2
                                                                          i
                                                                 (y−E)2
                                            (
                                              exp − (E−E)  2
                                                         2sE
                                                               +    2
                                                                  2snoise
                                                                               if E ≥ 0
                                 π(E|y) ∝                                                  ,                    (29)
                                              0                                otherwise

      where E and sE denote the mean and standard deviation of the prior distribution, respectively. Note that
      the Young’s modulus cannot be negative which is taken into account in the prior distribution (Eq. (28)).




                                                              10
         If we now consider the posterior distribution of the previous measurement to be the prior distribution of
195   the current measurement, the posterior for all nm measurements can be expressed as:
                                                                                      nm
                                                                 (yi −Ei )2 i
                                                               P
                                                  h
                                     π(E|y) ∝ exp −  (E−E)2
                                                            + i=1
                                                                                ,                               E ≥ 0,              (30)
                                                       2s2        2s2    E                   noise

      where π(E|y) = π(E|y1 , · · · , ynm ). Eq. (30) can now be written in the following form:
                                                                     )2
                                                                       
                                                             (E−E
                                            π(E|y) ∝ exp − 2s2post , E ≥ 0,                                                         (31)
                                                                                      post

      where E post and spost denote the mean and standard deviation of the posterior distribution, which is again
      a normal distribution (with the condition E ≥ 0). Both can be expressed as:
                                                                  n m
                                                s2noise E+s2E
                                                                  P
                                                                        i yi                  s
                                                                  i=1                                    s2noise s2E
                                     E post =                     n m           ,    spost =                      n m           .   (32)
                                                   s2noise +s2E         2i                          s2noise +s2E         2i
                                                                   P                                               P
                                                                  i=1                                               i=1

          Hence, it is possible to analytically examine the posterior distribution for linear elasticity if the noise
200   model is additive and the noise distribution as well as the prior distribution are (modified) normal distribu-
      tions [11]. For the other cases below, we use numerical techniques.

      3.2.2. Linear elasticity-perfect plasticity
           The parameters to be identified for the linear elastic-perfectly plastic model are the Young’s modulus
                                                                                         T
      and the initial yield stress, which are stored in the parameter vector x = E σy0 . Since we consider the
205   same experimental equipment and conditions as in the case of linear elasticity (i.e. the measured stresses are
      still polluted by noise stemming from the same normal distribution and the measured strains are still exact),
      the same additive noise model applies:

                                                              Y = σ(, x) + Ω,                                                      (33)
      where σ(, x) denotes the model response and is expressed in Eq. (8). Using Eq. (25) for the noise distribution,
      the likelihood function for a single stress measurement reads:

                                                                                      1          (y − σ(, x))2 
                               π(y|x) = πnoise (y − σ(, x)) = √                             exp −                 ,                (34)
                                                                                    2πsnoise          2s2noise
210   or:
                                                                                            2
                                                                          σy0                 σy0
                                                         y − E 1 − h  − E       − σy0 h  − E       !
                                      1
                      π(y|x) = √             exp      −                                                .                            (35)
                                    2πsnoise                             2s2noise
         Taking the physical constraints into account that the Young’s modulus and the initial yield stress must
      be nonnegative, the following prior distribution is selected:
                                                 (x−x)T Γ−1
                                      (                         
                                                         x (x−x)
                                        exp −           2           if E ≥ 0 and σy0 ≥ 0
                               π(x) ∝                                                    ,                  (36)
                                        0                           otherwise
      where x denotes the mean value vector of the prior distribution and Γx the covariance matrix of the prior.
      Substitution of Eq. (33) and Eq. (34) in the reduced variant of Bayes’ formula of Eq. (23), yields the following
215   posterior distribution for nm measurements:

                                                             nm
                                                                                                                 2
                                                             P                                σy0                 σy0
                                                                        yi − Ei 1 − h i − E        − σy0 h i − E        !
                               (x − x)T Γ−1
                           
                                         x (x − x)
       π(x|y) ∝ exp    −                           + i=1                                                                     . (37)
                                        2                                                 2s2noise


                                                                                11
      We again note that the probability of obtaining a negative Young’s modulus and yield stress is zero thanks
      to the selected prior distribution.
          It is worth noting that the presence of the Heaviside function in the posterior makes the posterior difficult
      to analyse analytically. We therefore resort to the adaptive MCMC approach in Section 5.

220   3.2.3. Linear elasticity-linear hardening
                                                                                             T
          The parameter vector for the linear elastic-linear hardening model reads x = E σy0 H . Assum-
      ing again the same experimental equipment and conditions (and hence, the same noise model and noise
      distribution), the likelihood function for a single measurement reads:
                                                                                  2
                                                       σy0              HE   σy0        σy0
                                      y − E 1 − h  − E     − σy0 + H+E  − E     h − E       !
                π(y|x) ∝ exp       −                                                             .                   (38)
                                                               2s2noise
         In addition to the physical constraints for the Young’s modulus and the initial yield stress, we also use
225   that plastic modulus H must be nonnegative. The following prior distribution is therefore selected:
                                         (x−x)T Γ−1
                               (                         
                                                  x (x−x)
                                 exp −           2           if E ≥ 0 and σy0 ≥ 0 and H ≥ 0
                        π(x) ∝                                                                .               (39)
                                 0                           otherwise
      Using Bayes’ formula, the posterior distribution for nm measurements reads:


                                (x − x)T Γ−1
                            
                                            x (x − x)
        π(x|y) ∝ exp    −                             +
                                           2
                                 n m
                                                                                         2
                                 P                         σy0           HE       σy0          σy0
                                       yi − Ei 1 − h i − E     − σy0 + H+E i − E     h i − E       !
                                i=1
                                                                                                                   . (40)
                                                                          2s2noise

      3.2.4. Linear elasticity-nonlinear hardening
          The parameter vector for the linear elastic-nonlinear hardening material description is denoted by x =
                      T
       E σy0 H n . Considering no change of experimental equipment (and hence, the same noise model
230   and noise distribution), the expression for the measured stress again reads as Eq. (33), where σ(, x) is given
      by Eq. (14). It is important to note that in contrast to the previous cases, model response σ(, x) is not a
      closed form expression (see Eq. (14)). The likelihood function for a single measurement is:
                                                            (y − σ(, x))2 
                                               π(y|x) ∝ exp −                 ,                                      (41)
                                                                 2s2noise
      where σ(, x) is numerically determined by solving Eq. (14). Choosing the prior distribution in the form of
      a modified normal distribution as:
                                     (x−x)T Γ−1
                          (                         
                                             x (x−x)
                            exp −           2          if E ≥ 0 and σy0 ≥ 0 and H ≥ 0 and n ≥ 0
                   π(x) ∝                                                                          ,         (42)
                            0                          otherwise
235   and employing the Bayes’ theorem, the posterior distribution for nm measurements reads:
                                                                                     n m
                                                                                           (yi − σ(i , x))2 !
                                                                                     P
                                                             T
                                                                 Γ−1
                                                   
                                                       (x − x)    x (x − x)          i=1
                                π(x|y) ∝ exp   −                                +                              .     (43)
                                                                 2                            2s2noise



                                                                     12
      4. Numerical procedures
      4.1. Markov chain Monte Carlo method (MCMC)
          Once the posterior is constructed, it needs to be analysed to determine the statistical summaries. For
      the aforementioned case of linear elasticity, the statistical summaries were established analytically, but for
240   the other cases we need to determine them numerically because they are only C0 -continuous. We will use a
      Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) technique for this.
          MCMC techniques are frequently employed, derivative-free numerical approaches to investigate posteriors
      [37–39]. They draw samples from the posterior to do so. Below, the fundamental concepts of the Monte
      Carlo method are discussed, as well as the adaptive Metropolis algorithm to perform the sampling.

245   4.1.1. Monte Carlo method
          The main purpose of the Monte Carlo method is to approximate integrals of the following form:
                                                  Z
                                              I=       g(x)π(x)dx,                                                             (44)
                                                               Rnp
      where π denotes the PDF of interest (in our case the posterior) and g : Rnp → Rng denotes an integrable
      function over Rnp . This integral can be approximated using the following quadrature:
                                                                       ns
                                                                   1 X
                                                            Î =          g(xi ),                                              (45)
                                                                   ns i=1
                 n
      where {xi }i s denotes a set of samples drawn from the PDF of interest (π) and the hat on Î represents the
250   numerically approximated equivalent of I. Drawing samples from π implies that most of the samples are in
      the domain in which numerical evaluations of π are nonzero. Note that Î converges according to [40]:
                                                                    s  n
                                                               1 X
                                                          lim         g(xi ) = I.                                              (46)
                                                        ns →+∞ ns
                                                                  i=1
                                                                                       b g ) is [41]:
      The numerical approximation of the components of the covariance matrix for g(x) (Γ
                                       ns 
                                  1 X                                 
                  (Γ
                   b g )jk =                gj (xi ) − Ij (gk (xi ) − Ik , j = 1, 2, · · · , ng , k = 1, 2, · · · , ng .       (47)
                               ns − 1 i=1
         The mean of the posterior (xpost ) can be computed by substituting g(x) = x and π = πpost in Eq. (44),
      which yields:
                                                    Z                            s        n
                                                                            1 X
                                          xpost =     x πpost (x)dx = lim          xi .                                        (48)
                                                  Rnp                ns →+∞ ns
                                                                               i=1
255   Furthermore, the components of the posterior’s covariance matrix are approximated as follows:

                                  ns 
                             1 X                                          
          (Γ
           b post )jk =                (xi )j − (xpost )j (xi )k − (xpost )k , j = 1, 2, · · · , np , k = 1, 2, · · · , np .   (49)
                          ns − 1 i=1

          If we assume that a sufficiently large number of samples is taken (i.e. ns is large), the MAP point can
      furthermore be approximated as [40]:

                                                        \ = argmax π(xi ).
                                                        MAP                                                                    (50)
                                                                    xi;i=1,...,ns

         The essential part of a Monte Carlo procedure is the drawing of admissible samples (xi ). Below, the
      standard and adaptive Metropolis algorithms are discussed as means to draw samples. The adaptive one is
260   the algorithm used in Section 5.


                                                                      13
      4.1.2. The standard Metropolis-Hastings and the adaptive Metropolis algorithms
          The standard Metropolis-Hastings approach is a frequently employed MCMC algorithm [40]. The basic
      idea of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is to explore the PDF of interest by making a random walk
      through parameter space x. Considering sample xi and its evaluation of the PDF, π(xi ), new sample xp is
265   proposed by drawing from a proposal distribution (q in Algorithm 1). If the PDF evaluated at the proposed
      sample (π(xp )) multiplied by the evaluation of the proposal distribution evaluated at xi , given the proposed
      sample (q(xi |xp )), is larger than the PDF at the current sample (π(xi )) multiplied by the evaluation of the
      proposal distribution at the proposed sample given the current sample (q(xp |xi )), the proposed sample is
      always accepted as the new sample. If π(xp )q(xi |xp ) < π(xi )q(xp |xi ) however, the proposed sample may
270   be accepted. The fact whether or not it is accepted depends on the ratio of scalar r in Algorithm 1. The
      ratio is compared to a random number generated from a uniform distribution. If the ratio is greater than
      the random number, the proposed sample is accepted. If the ratio is smaller than the random number, the
      proposed sample is rejected, and the current sample becomes the new sample. Otherwise, the proposed
      sample becomes the new sample. The algorithm is repeated for ns samples.

      Algorithm 1 The standard Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
       1: select the initial sample x0 ∈ Rnp
       2: for i = 0, 1, 2, ..., ns − 1 do
       3:     draw xp ∈ Rnp from the proposal distribution q(xp |xi ) in Eq. (53)
                                                                           
                                                        π(x )q(x |x )
       4:      calculate the ratio r(xi , xp ) = min 1, π(xpi )q(xpi |xpi )
             . π(·) denotes the target distribution (i.e. posterior).
       5:    draw u ∈ [0, 1] from uniform probability density
       6:    if r(xi , xp ) ≥ u then
       7:        xi+1 = xp
       8:    else
       9:        xi+1 = xi
      10:    end if
      11: end for


275         In case of a symmetric proposal distribution (as in this contribution), the following relation holds:

                                                           q(xi |xp ) = q(xp |xi ).                                 (51)
      Consequently, step 4 in Algorithm 1 simplifies to:
                                                                        π(x ) 
                                                                              p
                                                      r(xi , xp ) = min 1,        .                                 (52)
                                                                           π(xi )
      Note that the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm with a symmetric proposal distribution is commonly called the
      Metropolis algorithm.
          A commonly employed approach to check the stability and convergence of the algorithm is to trace
280   the generated samples and analyse their characteristics, after the algorithm is finished. The evolution of
      the mean value and the standard deviation can for instance be checked for convergence [32]. We refer the
      readers for more information to the review on assessing the convergence of the MCMC by Sinharay [42].
          The efficiency of the algorithm is influenced by the initial sample (x0 ) and the proposal distribution (q)
      [11]. The most common proposal distribution for the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (as employed here) is
285   of the following Gaussian form:
                                                                         1           2
                                                                                        
                                          q(xi |xp ) = q(xp |xi ) ∝ exp − 2 kxi − xp k ,                            (53)
                                                                         2γ
      where γ denotes the parameter that determines the width of the proposal distribution and must be tuned to
                                                                                       2.38
      obtain an efficient and converging algorithm. An efficient starting value is γ = √ np [43], where np denotes


                                                                     14
      the number of unknown parameters and hence, the dimension of the posterior for the cases presented above.
         To overcome the tuning of γ, Haario et al. [44] introduced the adaptive proposal (AP). The AP method
290   updates the width of the proposal distribution, using the existing knowledge of the posterior. The existing
      knowledge is based on the previous samples. For sample nK +1, the update employs the following formulation:

                                                     q(xp |xi ) ∼ N (xi , γ 2 RnK ),                         (54)
                       2                                                                             2
      where N (xi , γ RnK ) denotes a normal distribution with mean xi and covariance matrix γ RnK , of size
      np × np . To establish RnK , all nK previous samples are first stored in matrix K of size nK × np . RnK , is
      then computed as:
                                                                   1    e T K,
                                                        RnK =           K   e                                (55)
                                                                 nK − 1
295
            e = K − Kmean and Kmean reads:
      where K
                                                                   
                                                              kmean
                                                             kmean 
                                                     Kmean =  .                       ,                    (56)
                                                                   
                                                              .. 
                                                                     kmean     nK ×np

      and kmean denotes a row matrix of length np which is determined as follows:

                                          1 nP         n               n
                                             K          K              K
                                                                                  
                                                       P               P
                                kmean =         (K)i1      (K)i2 · · ·     (K)inp .                          (57)
                                          i i=1        i=1             i=1

            The following relation is used for N (xi , γ 2 RnK ) in this contribution:
                                                                           γ       e T N (0, In ),
                                          N (xi , γ 2 RnK ) ∼ xi + √               K           K
                                                                                                             (58)
                                                                          nK − 1
      where InK denotes the identity matrix of size nK × nK and N (0, InK ) denotes the nK -dimensional normal
      distribution.
300       Note that it is computationally inefficient to update the proposal distribution after each new sample is
      generated. In the numerical examples in this study therefore, updating takes place once per 1000 sample gen-
      erations. Algorithm 2 shows the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm with the symmetric AP proposal (Eq. (58))
      that is employed here.

      Algorithm 2 The Metropolis algorithm with AP proposal
                                                         2.38
       1: select the initial sample x0 ∈ Rnp and set γ = √ n          p
       2: for i = 0, 1, 2, ..., ns − 1 do
       3:    draw xp ∈ Rnp from the proposal distribution q(xp |xi ) in Eq. (58)
                                                                
                                                         π(x )
       4:       calculate the ratio r(xi , xp ) = min 1, π(xpi )
             . π(·) denotes the target distribution (i.e. posterior).
       5:    draw u ∈ [0, 1] from uniform probability density
       6:    if r(xi , xp ) ≥ u then
       7:        xi+1 = xp
       8:    else
       9:        xi+1 = xi
      10:    end if
      11:    per 1000 samples
      12:         update matrix K  e
      13: end for




                                                                     15
      4.2. Posterior predictive distribution (PPD)
305      Once the posterior is established, the posterior predictive distribution can be used to predict new mea-
      surements, given the current measurements. A comparison between the newly generated measurements and
      the current (yet observed) measurements may then indicate if a different model and/or prior need to be used.
      For instance, if the envelope of the new measurements differs substantially from the envelope of the current
      measurements, the current measurements are unlikely to be generated using the current model and/or prior
310   and the user may want to select a new model and/or prior.
                                                         T
         Considering measurements y = y1 · · · ynm , the posterior predictive distribution of new measure-
      ment y new for new strain new , given the current measurements, reads [45]:
                                                       Z
                                       new      new
                                   π(y |y, ,  ) =          π(y new |x, new )π(x|y, )dx,                   (59)
                                                         Rnp
                               T
      where  = 1 · · · nm denotes the vector of the strains at which stresses y were measured. Note that
      we have so far neglected  in the notation.
315       Computing the integral in Eq. (59) is usually challenging for high dimensional problems. However, the
      Monte Carlo Markov chain can be employed to draw samples from the PPD for a new measurement (y new ),
      given measurement vector y. This can be achieved by employing a sampling procedure twice. First, samples
      are drawn from the posterior distribution for the parameters, given the measurements (π(x|y, )). Note that
      this is already performed during the numerical analysis of the posterior and hence, if those samples are saved,
320   this procedure does not have to be applied again. Second, the ith sample is replaced in π(y new |xi , new ),
      which is subsequently used to generate a sample for new measurement yinew .


      5. Examples

         All formulations derived in the previous section are investigated below. The effect of the prior distribution
      on the posterior distribution is studied, as well as the ability of the current formulations to recover a
325   material parameter distribution when they are taken from a specific distribution. Also, BI’s ability to
      recover correlations between different material parameters is exposed. First however, we will identify the
      noise distribution and its parameters.

      5.1. Noise distribution
          To determine the noise distribution and its parameters, two sets of ‘calibration experiments’ can be
330   performed. First, a test is performed without any specimen. The stress-strain measurements of this test are
      shown in Fig. 2(a). It shows that the PDF of the noise in the ‘stress measurements’ is a normal distribution
      with a zero mean and a standard deviation of snoise .
          Second, the evolution of the noise distribution (including its parameters) is determined. To this purpose, a
      tensile test is performed on a calibration specimen (of which the Young’s modulus is known). The artificially
335   generated results are presented in Fig. 2(b). The mean stress value varies linearly with the strain. Standard
      deviation snoise remains the same however.
          Thus, the ‘noise calibration measurements’ indicate that an additive noise model can be used and the
      stresses are polluted by realisations coming from a normal noise distribution with standard deviation snoise .
      Now, we will employ BI to identify the Young’s modulus of the linear elastic model.

340   5.2. Linear elasticity
      Identification of the Young’s modulus. In the first example, a specimen with a Young’s modulus of 210 GPa
      is considered, which is to be identified. ‘Noise calibration experiments’ were performed and the noise in the
      stress follows the normal distribution of Eq. (25) with snoise = 0.01 GPa. For only one stress measurement
      of y = 0.1576 GPa with corresponding strain  = 7.25 × 10−4 , the posterior distribution is calculated using




                                                               16
                σ                                                                σ




                            πnoise (ω)
                                                                                                                 



                      (a) Fitted noise distribution                                  (b) The shifted noise distribution

      Figure 2: Schematic of the stress-strain measurements (red circles) of the ‘noise calibration experiments’, including the noise
      distributions (dashed). The theoretical stress-strain relation (which is exact for the calibration experiments) is presented as a
      solid line in the diagram on the right.



345   Eq. (31). Selecting the prior distribution as in Eq. (28) with mean E = 150 GPa and a relatively large
      standard deviation of sE = 50 GPa, the posterior reads:
                                                                 )2
                                                                   
                                                         (E−E
                                        π(E|y) ∝ exp − 2s2post , E ≥ 0,                                 (60)
                                                                          post


      where E post = 212.6486 GPa and spost = 13.2964 GPa.
          Fig. 3 shows this posterior distribution, as well as the prior distribution and the value predicted by the
      least squares method, for one and five measurements. Fig. 4 presents the linear elastic responses for one and
350   for ten measurements. The figure also shows the stress-strain responses using Young’s moduli drawn from
      the 95% credible region (i.e. the region that contains 95% of the posterior) of the posterior as well as the
      posterior predictions. One can see that envelope associated with the 95% credible region is narrower than
      the 95% prediction interval. Note that the 95% prediction interval is obtained using the posterior predictive
      distribution and its upper and lower bounds read:

                                                 prediction bounds = PPD ± 2sPPD ,                                                (61)
355   where PPD denotes the mean of posterior predictive distribution for the new measurement (i.e. y new in (59))
      and sPPD denotes its standard deviation.
          Two points can be observed in Fig. 3. First, the strain at which a measurement is made has a strong
      influence on the posterior. This can be observed by comparing the posterior of Fig. 3(a) with that in
      Fig. 3(b) for only one measurement (the distribution in red, denoted by π(E|y1 )). The latter distribution is
360   significantly wider and its MAP point is relatively distant from the specimen’s Young’s modulus. Hence, a
      measurement made at a comparatively large strain reduces the width of the posterior distribution (i.e. reduces
      the uncertainty).
          The second observation is that for an increasing number of measurements, the posterior becomes narrower
      and the MAP point moves closer to the specimen’s Young’s modulus.
365       By comparing the MAP point for a single measurement in Fig. 3(b) (E post = 207.2821 GPa) with the
      result of the least squares method for the same measurement (Els = 210.2216 GPa), one can notice the effect
      of the selected prior distribution. One interpretation of this is that the least squares method gives a more
      accurate result than BI (although this depends the selected prior), as the result of the least squares method
      is closer to the specimen’s Young’s modulus than the MAP point determined using BI. On the other hand,
370   the result determined using the least squares method is not the actual Young’s modulus of the specimen


                                                                     17
      (210 GPa), whereas the posterior distribution of BI does include this value. Furthermore, the MAP point and
      mean value of BI, come with an uncertainty in terms of the parameter value itself. This can be considered
      as an advantage if one wants to include this uncertainty, instead of including one deterministic value.
          The main point is that BI cannot be directly compared to the least squares method, because in contrast
375   to the latter, BI results in a posterior probability distribution that represents the probability of each possible
      value to occur.




                          (a) One observation                                       (b) Five successive observations

      Figure 3: Linear elasticity: The prior, the posterior and the value predicted by least squares method for one measurement (a)
      and five measurements (b). The distributions are not normalised. The strain at which a measurement is made has a considerable
      influence on the posterior. This can be observed by comparing the posterior of (a) (π(E|y), red line) with the posterior of (b),
      if only the first measurement is considered (π(E|y1 ), red line). An increase of the number of measurements results in narrower
      posteriors, with their MAP estimates closer to the true Young’s modulus.




                          (a) One observation                                             (b) Ten observations

      Figure 4: Linear elasticity: The measurements, the posterior prediction and the stress-strain curves created using the posterior
      and mean for (a) one measurement and (b) ten measurements. The envelope associated with the 95% credible region is narrower
      than the 95% prediction interval.




                                                                    18
      The influence of the prior. Now, we will study the effect of the prior distribution on the MAP point (which
      is the same as the mean value for the normal posteriors in this subsection). In Fig. 5 the MAP points are
      shown as a function of the mean and the standard deviation of the prior. The MAP points are presented for
380   different numbers of measurements. As can be seen, an increase of the number of measurements results in a
      flatter surface, which means that the influence of the prior distribution decreases.




      Figure 5: Linear elasticity: The influence of the prior (i.e. the mean value and the standard deviation) on the resulting MAP
      point for different numbers of measurements. Increasing the number of the measurements results in a flatter surface which
      indicates a decreasing influence of the prior distribution.


      Recovering material heterogeneity. A last important point to show using the linear elastic model is BI’s ability
      (or inability for the current formulation) to capture the intrinsic heterogeneity of the material parameters.
      The question here is thus if BI is able to recover the distribution of the Young’s modulus if several specimens
385   are tested and their Young’s moduli are taken from a specific underlying distribution. To this end, 25
      specimens are considered of which the Young’s moduli are taken from a normal distribution with a mean
      value of 210 GPa and a standard deviation of 10 GPa (blue curve in Fig. 6). For each specimen ten
      measurements are made. The aforementioned noise model and noise distribution are applied.
          The resulting posterior is presented by the red curve in Fig. 6, which is a (modified) normal distribution
390   with E post = 215.3971 GPa and spost = 0.8561 GPa. The posterior is substantially narrower than the
      distribution of the specimens’ Young’s moduli and hence, using the BI formulations of this contribution, the
      intrinsic heterogeneity of the material itself cannot be captured. This entails that the width of the posterior
      distributions (represented by spost in this subsection) is only a measure of the uncertainty of the MAP points
      and the mean value and not of the material heterogeneity.




                                                                   19
                                            1
                                                                                Specimen elastic
                                                                                 modulus PDF
                                                                                Posterior PDF
                                           0.8


                                           0.6




                                       :
                                           0.4


                                           0.2


                                            0
                                            160       180      200     220          240        260
                                                                 E (GPa)


      Figure 6: Linear elasticity: The distribution of the specimens’ Young’s moduli and the resulting posterior. The PDFs are
      not normalised. The current formulation is clearly not able to recover the material heterogeneity. To be able to recover the
      material heterogeneity, one needs to consider both the intrinsic uncertainty of the material parameters as well as that of the
      measurements.


395   5.3. Linear elasticity-perfect plasticity
      Identification of the material parameters. In the first example of this subsection, a linear elastic-perfectly
      plastically behaving specimen is considered with Young’s modulus E = 210 GPa and yield stress σy0 =
      0.25 GPa. Twelve measurements are generated by employing the same noise distribution as in the previous
      subsection. The prior distribution of Eq. (36) is furthermore selected with the following mean vector and
400   covariance matrix:
                                                                             
                                        200                2500        0
                                 x=           GPa, Γx =                           GPa2 .                        (62)
                                       0.29                  0   2.7778 × 10−4
          Consequently, the posterior of Subsection 3.2.2 is of the form of Eq. (37), which is investigated by the
      MCMC approach given in Subsection 4.1.2. Running the chain for 104 samples whilst burning the first 3000
      samples (i.e. the first 3000 samples are not used to determine the mean, the covariance matrix and the MAP
      estimate) yields:

                                                                            4.1064 × 10−4
                                                                                       
                        bpost = 208.9859 GPa, Γ                   29.807
                        x                          b post =                                 GPa2 ,            (63)
                                   0.2578                     4.1064 × 10−4 1.5067 × 10−5
405   and
                                                                 
                                                     \ = 208.4475 GPa,
                                                     MAP                                                                       (64)
                                                           0.2578
      where the hat sign (b·) denotes the numerical approximation.
          Fig. 7(a) shows the samples generated by the adaptive MCMC approach which are used to approximate
      the posterior distribution. The domains presented in Fig. 7(b) show which of the measurements are included
      in the purely elastic part and which fall within the elastoplastic part. These discrete domains are a result
410   of the C0 -continuity of Eq. (8). In domain ‘a’ (in which no samples are generated by the adaptive MCMC
      approach), all the measurements are considered to be in the elastoplastic part. In domain ‘b’ on the other
      hand, the first measurement (the one with the smallest strain) is considered to be in the purely elastic part
      and the others remain in the elastoplastic part. Continuing like this, in domain ‘c’ the second measurement
      is also considered to be in the purely elastic part. Finally, in domain ‘m’ all measurements are considered


                                                                   20
415   to fall within the elastoplastic domain. Based on Fig. 7(b) the MAP point is clearly located in the domain
      in which the first six measurements are considered to be in the purely elastic part and the remaining in the
      elastoplastic part.
          The 95% credible region is shown together with the posterior distribution in Fig. 8(a). The possible stress-
      strain responses inside the credible region as well as the posterior prediction are presented in Fig. 8(b). The
420   posterior distribution seems to be roughly of an elliptical shape with its primary axes almost along the E-axis
      and σy0 -axis. This entails that the correlation between the two material parameters is not significant. One
      has to notice though, that the assumed prior is uncorrelated. In other words, the prior covariance matrix
      (Γx ) is diagonal. It is therefore interesting to investigate the influence of the off-diagonal term of the prior
      covariance matrix on the posterior covariance matrix. In Fig. 9, this influence is graphically presented for the
425   three terms of the posterior covariance matrix (note that both the prior covariance matrix and the posterior
      covariance matrix are symmetric). It seems that an increase of (Γx )12 leads to some decreasing trend for
       b post )11 and some increasing trend for (Γ
      (Γ                                            b post )12 . However, it is difficult to assess whether or not these
      trends can be considered as meaningful.

                                                                                0.6                                             #10 -4
                                                                                                             Domain m                    8
                                                                                                                        ..
                                                                                                                         ..              7
      #10!3                                                                     0.5                                       .
                                                                                                                ...
          1                                                                                                      ..
                                                                                                                  ..                     6
                                                                                                                   ..
           0.8                                                                  0.4                                 ..
                                                                                                                     ..
                                                                                                                      ..                 5
                                                                    <y0 (GPa)

                                                                                                                       ..
           0.6                                                                                                            ..
       :




                                                                                0.3                          Domain g                    4
           0.4
                                                                                                             Domain f
                                                                                                              ..                         3
           0.2                                                                  0.2                            .
                                                                                                               ..
                                                                                                                ..
                                                                                                                 ..                      2
             0
           0.3                                                                  0.1                          Domain c
                                                                                                             Domain b                    1
                                                           250                                               Domain a
                   0.25
                                                200                              0                                                       0
                                                                                 180   200             220                     240
                  <y0 (GPa)    0.2   150                                                     E (GPa)
                                           E (GPa)
      (a) Samples generated by the adaptive MCMC approach (b) Samples generated by the adaptive MCMC approach
                                                          (top view) including different domains

      Figure 7: Linear elasticity-perfect plasticity: Two different views of the samples generated by the adaptive MCMC approach
      to approximate the posterior. The colours represent the value of the posterior, which in the left image is also shown along
      the z-axis. In Fig. 7(b) several domains are shown. Each of these domains corresponds to a region for which the number of
      measurements considered to be in the purely elastic part is constant (e.g zero in domain a and one in domain b).




                                                                  21
             0.3                                              #10 -4
                                                                       8
                                          95% credible region
                                                                       7
            0.28
                                                                       6

            0.26                                                       5
<y0 (GPa)




                                                                       4
            0.24
                                                                       3

                                                                       2
            0.22
                                                                       1

             0.2                                                       0
                   160    180   200   220      240      260
                                 E (GPa)

                         (a) The 95% credible region                        (b) The measurements, the posterior prediction and the
                                                                            stress-strain curves

Figure 8: Linear elasticity-perfect plasticity: The 95% credible region and the posterior distribution (a), the measurements, the
posterior prediction and the stress-strain curves created using the 95% credible region of the posterior (b).




                                                          b post )11
                                (a) Effect of (Γx )12 on (Γ                                               b post )12
                                                                                (b) Effect of (Γx )12 on (Γ




                                                                                b post )22
                                                      (c) Effect of (Γx )12 on (Γ

Figure 9: Linear elasticity-perfect plasticity: Effect of the off-diagonal component of the prior’s covariance matrix on the
posterior’s covariance matrix. It seems that an increase of (Γx )12 leads to a decreasing trend of (Γ       b post )11 and a increasing
          b post )12 . However, it is difficult to assess whether or not a true trend is present in these results.
trend of (Γ




                                                                           22
                                                        b post )11
                              (a) Effect of (Γx )12 on (Γ                                           b post )12
                                                                          (b) Effect of (Γx )12 on (Γ




                                                                             b post )22
                                                   (c) Effect of (Γx )12 on (Γ

      Figure 10: Linear elasticity-perfect plasticity: Effect of the off-diagonal components of the prior’s covariance matrix on the
      posterior’s covariance matrix if the measurements are generated from ten specimens with their material parameters drawn from
      a normal distribution given in Eq. (65). No real trends can be observed.



      The influence of the prior on the correlation between the material parameters. The next example focuses
430   on the ability of the current formulation to capture a correlation between the Young’s modulus and the
      initial yield stress if they are correlated. To this end, ten specimens are considered of which the material
      parameters are governed by a normal distribution with the following mean vector and covariance matrix:

                                                                          10−4
                                                                                
                                          210                  100
                                 xspc =          GPa, Γspc =                         GPa2 .                  (65)
                                          0.25                10−4 1.1111 × 10−4
      For each specimen, twelve measurements are made. Using the same prior as in the previous example (see
      Eq. (62)) and the adaptive MCMC approach for 104 samples whilst burning the first 3000 samples, yields:

                                                                      −8.396 × 10−4
                                                                                  
                      bpost = 211.1077 GPa, Γ             5.5373
                      x                      b post =                                   GPa2 .           (66)
                                0.2519                 −8.396 × 10−4 1.8174 × 10−6
435   The MAP point is given by:
                                                                   
                                                            210.5923
                                                     MAP =
                                                     \                GPa.                                                     (67)
                                                             0.2521
          These results show that the correlation of the posterior is not the same as that of the distribution of the
      actual material. This corresponds closely with the observation that the formulations in this contribution are
      unable to capture any of the intrinsic uncertainty of the material parameters. Fig. 10 shows the effect of the
      off-diagonal component of the prior’s covariance matrix (Γx ) on the components of the posterior’s covariance
440   matrix (Γpost ). Again, no real trends can be observed.




                                                                     23
      5.4. Linear elasticity-linear hardening
      Identification of the material parameters. This subsection deals with the Bayesian formulation for the linear
      elastic-linear hardening material description. A specimen with Young’s modulus E = 210 GPa, initial yield
      stress σy0 = 0.25 GPa and plastic modulus H = 50 GPa is regarded. Twelve measurements are created
445   by employing the same noise distribution as in the previous subsection. The prior distribution is given by
      Eq. (39) with the following properties:
                                                                                
                                     200                2500          0          0
                              x = 0.29 GPa, Γx =  0         2.7778 × 10−4     0  GPa2 .                    (68)
                                      60                  0           0         100
         The adaptive MCMC algorithm for 104 samples whilst burning the first 3000 samples yields:


                                                                         −1.2746 × 10−2
                                                                                                           
                   207.4586                    36.5642                                            −3.7886
          xpost =
          b         0.2533  GPa, Γpost =
                                   b       −1.2746 × 10−2                4.0359 × 10−5        −2.6218 × 10−2 
                                                                                                                GPa2 ,      (69)
                    55.9187                    −3.7886                   −2.6218 × 10−2           66.8214

      and
                                                                     
                                                             206.9528
                                                        \ =  0.2548  GPa.
                                                        MAP                                                                 (70)
                                                              55.2838
      Fig. 11 shows the generated samples by the adaptive MCMC approach in the E − σy0 − H space, including
450   the projections on the E − σy0 , E − H and σy0 − H planes.
         The 95% credible region is presented in Fig. 12(a) and the stress-strain responses associated with it, as
      well as the posterior prediction are shown in Fig. 12(b).


                                                                                              #10 -3
                                                                                                       1.5



                                          90
                                          80
                                          70                                                           1
                                H (GPa)




                                          60
                                          50
                                          40
                                          30                                                           0.5
                                           20
                                          0.3

                                                                                        240
                                                 0.25                             220
                                                                          200
                                                                  180                                  0
                                                <y0 (GPa)   0.2
                                                                        E (GPa)



      Figure 11: Linear elasticity-linear hardening: Samples generated by the adaptive MCMC approach to approximate the posterior
      distribution and its projection on the three planes.




                                                                  24
                 80
       H (GPa)




                 60


                 40


                  20
                 0.3
                                                                  240
                            0.25                            220
                                                     200
                           <y0 (GPa)   0.2    180     E (GPa)


                              (a) The 95% credible region                  (b) The measurements, the posterior prediction and the
                                                                           stress-strain curves

      Figure 12: Linear elasticity-linear hardening: The 95% credible region and the posterior distribution (a) and the measurements,
      the posterior prediction and the stress-strain curves associated with the 95% credible region (b).


      5.5. Linear elasticity-nonlinear hardening
      Identification of the material parameters. In this subsection, twelve measurements are generated using E =
455   210 GPa, σy0 = 0.25 GPa, H = 2 GPa, n = 0.57 (which are to be identified) and the same noise distribution
      as in the previous subsections. The prior distribution is selected in the form of Eq. (42) with the following
      mean vector and covariance matrix:
                                                                                              
                            200                    2500         0             0          0
                          0.29     GPa, Γx =  0
                                                        2.7778 × 10−4       0          0        GPa2 .
                                                                                                 
                 x=                                                                                           (71)
                           2.5                    0          0          0.1111        0       
                       0.57 GPa−1                    0          0             0    0.0025 GPa−2
      Running the adaptive MCMC approach for 104 samples and burning the first 3000 samples yields:

                                                                                 
                                                                        210.444
                                                                        0.254    
                                                            bpost = 
                                                            x                      GPa,
                                                                        2.1937   
                                                                     0.5988 GPa−1
                                                       −8.1743 × 10−3                                  −2.2095 × 10−3 GPa−1
                                                                                                                           
                      24.3496                                                          0.1501
                  −8.1743 × 10−3                       9.5238 × 10−5             −6.8472 × 10−4        1.8694 × 10−4 GPa−1 
                                                                                                                             GPa2 ,
      b post = 
      Γ               0.1501                          −6.8472 × 10−4              9.5319 × 10−2        5.4179 × 10−3 GPa−1 
                −2.2095 × 10−3 GPa−1                1.8694 × 10−4 GPa−1        5.4179 × 10−3 GPa−1      1.0629 × 10−3 GPa−2
                                                                                                                          (72)
      and
                                                                         
                                                              210.0794
                                                              0.2536     
                                                      \ =
                                                      MAP                  GPa.                                                (73)
                                                               2.198     
                                                                       −1
                                                           0.5978 GPa
460   The stress-strain responses associated with the 95% credible region of the posterior and the posterior pre-
      diction are presented in Fig. 13.


                                                                          25
      Figure 13: Liner elasticity-nonlinear hardening: The measurements, the stress-strain curves associated with the 95% credible
      region and the posterior prediction.



      6. Additional concepts for parameter identification from uniaxial tensile results

         In the previous sections, we have introduced BI for the identification of elastic and elastoplastic pa-
      rameters. The formulation of the framework was relatively basic. In this section, we will discuss, without
465   too many details, some changes to the framework if (1) a viscoelastic model is considered instead, (2) not
      only the stress measurements are uncertain, but also the strain measurements, and (3) the model itself is
      uncertain as well.

      6.1. Viscoelasticity
          Viscoelasticity differs from the aforementioned elastoplasticity by its rate-dependency (whilst no plastic
470   deformation occurs). Consequently, the rate-dependency must be identified, besides one or more stiffness
      parameters. The rate at which uniaxial tensile tests are performed thus comes into play. On the other hand,
      the mechanical responses are C1 -continuous, which results in C1 -continuous posteriors. This may be con-
      sidered as more straightforward to treat with MCMC approaches than the posteriors of the aforementioned
      elastoplastic descriptions.
475       Different types of uniaxial tensile tests can be considered. In a constant rate experiment, a constant clamp
      velocity is prescribed, resulting in a stress-time response. In a relaxation test, a user-selected displacement
      (i.e. strain) is enforced as fast as possible in the beginning of the test and then kept constant. The result
      of this is a stress-time response. In a creep test, a user-selected force (i.e. stress) is prescribed as fast as
      possible in the beginning of the test and then kept constant. The result of this is a strain-time response.
480   In relaxation and creep tests, the stress-strain response for the material descriptions in this contribution
      must be replaced by a stress-time response or a strain-time response. As these are both C1 -continuous, their
      posteriors are also C1 -continuous and hence, the MCMC algorithm to explore them is easier to implement
      than for elastoplasticity.
          The study of Rappel et al. [25] shows that the effect of the prior on the mean and MAP point in
485   viscoelasticity is larger than for elastoplasticity. The influence is especially larger for the damping parameter.
      Although an increase of the number of measurements decreases the influence of the prior, its influence on
      the damping parameter remains recognisable. An interesting result of using BI is that it was shown that the
      uncertainty level of the identified parameter values is substantially larger if uniaxial tensile tests at constant
      strain-rates are used than if relaxation or creep tests are used.



                                                                  26
490   6.2. Noise in both stress and strain
          Depending on the experimental setup, the strains may also be contaminated by noise. The noise of the
      strains may therefore be worth to incorporate. The additive noise model if both the stresses and strains are
      contaminated by their own stochastic noise, can be expressed as follows:
                                                (
                                                  Y = σ(, x) + Ωy
                                                                      ,                                       (74)
                                                  ∗ =  + Ω  ∗
      where ∗ denotes the measured strain,  the true strain, Ωy the error of the stress measurement and Ω∗ the
495   error of the strain measurement. Because the information from both the measured stress and the measured
      strain is used here, Bayes’ formula for multiple variables must be employed [46]:

                                                             π(x)π(∗ )π(y|x, ∗ )
                                             π(x|y, ∗ ) =                         .                            (75)
                                                                π(∗ )π(y|∗ )
      Since the denominator in Eq. (75) is a constant number, the equation above can be written as:

                                                π(x|y, ∗ ) ∝ π(x)π(y|x, ∗ ).                                  (76)
                                       ∗
      The likelihood function, π(y|x,  ), must be determined by integration (over  [36]), because π(y|x, ) can be
      determined directly, but π(y|x, ∗ ) not. To this end, we write:
                                                         Z a
                                                    ∗
                                            π(y|x,  ) =     π(y|x, )π(|∗ )d,                               (77)
                                                             0

500   where a denotes the physical upper bound of the tensile tester (i.e. the ratio of the original length of the
      specimen and the maximum distance that the clamps can move). Using Eq. (74), one can express conditional
      probabilities π(y|x, ) and π(|∗ ) as follows:
                                               (
                                                  π(y|x, ) = πy (y − σ(, x))
                                                                               ,                              (78)
                                                  π(|∗ ) = π∗ (∗ − )
      where πy (ωy ) and π∗ (ω∗ ) denote the noise distributions of the errors in the stress measurements and the
      strain measurements, respectively. For nm independent measurements, we write:
                                                                 nm
                                                                 Y
                                                π(y|x, ∗ ) =          π(yi |x, ∗i ),                          (79)
                                                                 i=1
                                 T                                                                           T
      where y = y1 · · · ynm denotes the vector with the nm stress measurements, ∗ = ∗1 · · · ∗nm the
                                                                                               
505

      vector with the nm measured strains and π(yi |x, ∗i ) is given in Eq. (77). Further details on the resulting
      likelihoods for different material models is presented in [47].
          We now focus on a simple example for linear elasticity with one measurement point, given by y =
      0.1576 GPa and ∗ = 7.25 × 10−4 . Both noise distributions are considered as normal distributions with a
510   zero mean and sy = 0.01 GPa and s∗ = 0.0001 for the noise in stress and the noise in the strain, respectively.
          In Fig. 14 the posteriors are shown if only the noise in the stress measurement is considered and if
      the noise in the stress measurement as well as in the strain measurement is considered. The prior is also
      presented, which is in form of Eq. (28) with mean E = 150 GPa and standard deviation sE = 50 GPa. Not
      only is the posterior for the double uncertainty case wider than the other one, it is also asymmetric.




                                                                 27
      Figure 14: Noise in the stress and strain: The prior and posterior if both the stress and the strain are corrupted by noise (black
      dots), the posterior if only the stress is corrupted (red) and the value predicted by the least squares method (blue dashed). The
      posterior for the case with noise in the stress and strain is wider than the posterior for the case with noise in the stress only.
      Note furthermore that the posterior if only the noise in the stress is considered is a (modified) normal distribution (symmetric),
      but the posterior if both noises are incorporated neither is a (modified) normal distribution, nor is it symmetric.


515       Fig. 15 shows the posterior predictions for the same case, except that ten measurements are considered.
      One can see that incorporating the error results in a wider envelope that includes more validation points.
      Note that the validation points are only used to assess the quality of the predictions based on the identified
      material parameter (i.e. E) and not for the actual identification.
          Incorporating not only the error in the stress, but also the error in the strain often results in a larger uncer-
520   tainty (wider posterior) and consequently, the posterior prediction interval encompasses more measurement
      data. More information can be found in [47].

      6.3. Model uncertainty
          So far in this contribution, the modelling error (model uncertainty) has not been incorporated. However,
      no model is completely correct and model uncertainty as an error source may be incorporated. A framework
525   able to do so was developed by Kennedy and O’Hagan [10] (the ‘KOH’ framework). In this framework, the
      difference between model response σ(, x) and true response σtrue is written as an additive uncertainty term
      [48]:

                                                              Y = σtrue + Ω,                                                       (80)
      with

                                                       σtrue = σ(, x) + d(, xd ),                                                (81)
      where d(, xd ) denotes the model uncertainty, which may be assumed to depend on the input (i.e. strain 
530   here), and xd denotes the parameter vector of the model uncertainty. Assuming that both the form and
      parameters of the noise distribution of the stress measurements are known, the likelihood function now reads:

                                             π(y|x, xd ) = πnoise (y − σ(, x) − d(, xd )).                                       (82)



                                                                     28
      (a) Uncertainty in both the stress and the strain measure-                       (b) Uncertainty in the stress only
      ments

      Figure 15: Noise in the stress and strain: The measurements, the validation points, the posterior prediction and the stress-strain
      curves associated with the 95% credible region of the posterior for (a) noise in the stress and the strain and (b) noise in the
      stress only. One can see that the uncertainty is larger for the case with noise in the stress and strain, than that for the case
      with noise in the stress only. Consequently, the posterior predictions if both the noise in the stress and strain is incorporated,
      includes more validation points.



      Note that we have not incorporated the error in the strain measurements for simplicity. Readers are referred
      to [47] for cases in which the error in the strain is also considered.
          Using Eqs. (23) and (82), the posterior distribution for a single measurement can be written as:

                                                  π(x, xd |y) ∝ π(y|x, xd )π(x)π(xd ).                                             (83)
535   For several independent measurements, the final likelihood function is the product of the likelihood function
      for each measurement:
                                                          nm
                                                          Y
                                          π(y|x, xd ) =         πnoise (yi − σ(i , x) − d(i , xd )).                             (84)
                                                          i=1

          After establishing the posterior, the posterior needs to be sampled numerically (see Subsection 4.1.1) in
      order to obtain the statistical summaries (e.g. mean value, MAP point or covariance matrix). Note that
      the posterior distribution of Eq. (83) is a joint distribution of x and xd . In order to sample the marginal
540   distribution of each parameter (e.g. the Young’s modulus), one only needs to consider the samples of that
      specific parameter in the joint posterior distribution (i.e. Eq.(83)) and ignore those of the other parameters
      [49].
          Various formulations have been employed in different studies to express the model uncertainty term in
      Eq. (81). Probably the simplest way is to represent the model uncertainty using a single deterministic
545   variable [50]. It can also be described by a deterministic, input-dependent function [51]. Another way
      to express this uncertainty is to describe it by a random variable coming from a normal distribution and
      include the parameters of this distribution in the posterior distribution [47, 48, 50]. The parameters of the
      normal distribution from which the model uncertainty is originating can also be input-dependent functions
      (i.e. strain) [47, 48]. The model uncertainty can also be represented as a Gaussian process [10, 52, 53]. Some
550   more formulations to describe model uncertainty can be found in [48].
          As an example here, we consider a nonlinear curve (i.e. dashed line in Fig. 16(a)) as our true mate-
      rial response, whereas the model uses linear elasticity. Thirty measurements are generated artificially (see


                                                                       29
      Fig. 16(a)). Model uncertainty is described by a random variable coming from a normal distribution with
      constant parameters and hence, the mean and standard deviation of this normal distribution appear as
555   parameters in the posterior.
          The marginal posteriors of the Young’s modulus are presented in Fig. 16(b). One can observe that the
      incorporation of model uncertainty in this example results in a wider posterior distribution that includes the
      true value, although its MAP point is located further away from the true value. If the error in the strain is
      incorporated as well, the posterior at the true value increases even more.
560       The posterior predictions for these three cases are shown in Fig. 17. Incorporating model uncertainty
      clearly results in a wider prediction interval. If both the error in the strain and model uncertainty are
      incorporated however, the prediction interval becomes even wider and all measurement points and validation
      points are present within its bounds.




                             (a) True curve                                    (b) Marginal posteriors of Young’s modulus

      Figure 16: Model uncertainty: (a) The true stress-strain curve from which the measurements are generated, as well as the linear
      stress-strain curve with the true Young’s modulus. (b) The marginal posterior distribution of the Young’s modulus with no
      model uncertainty (red curve), with model uncertainty and error in the stress (blue curve) and with model uncertainty and
      error in both the stress and the strain measurements (black curve). Incorporating model uncertainty results in a posterior
      distribution that includes the true Young’s modulus. In case the error in the strain is considered as well, results furthermore in
      a higher possibility at the true value.




      7. Conclusions

565      Although BI has been employed in various studies for parameter identification, most may not be straight-
      forward to understand for those who are new to the subject. In this contribution, we have aimed to explain
      BI in a straightforward and didactic manner. For this purpose, a number of Bayesian inference formulations
      are presented to identify elastic and elastoplastic material parameters from uniaxial tensile results. Elastic
      and elastoplastic material models are chosen for two reasons: (1) they are widely used in solid mechanics
570   and (2) they include the most simple material behaviour (linear elasticity), as well as increasingly complex
      descriptions such as linear elasticity-nonlinear hardening, which entails C0 -continuous, implicit responses.
         The following conclusions can be made based on the examples given in Section 5:

       (1) The results of BI cannot directly be compared to those of the least squares method, since the result of
           BI is a distribution and that of the least squares method is a single value.
575    (2) If one wants to compare the two nevertheless, point estimators such as the mean and MAP point can
           be compared to the results of the least squares method. It is shown in Fig. 5 that the selected prior


                                                                     30
                           (a) Error in the stress                      (b) Error in the stress and model uncertainty




                                        (c) Errors in the stress and strain and model uncer-
                                        tainty

      Figure 17: Model uncertainty: The measurements, validation points and the posterior predictions. One can see that if model
      uncertainty is considered, the prediction interval becomes wider. Furthermore, only if model uncertainty as well as the errors
      in both the stress and the strain measurements are incorporated, all measured and validation points are inside the prediction
      interval.


            distribution may significantly influence the results. Fig. 5 also shows that the influence of the prior
            decreases significantly if the number of measurements increases.
       (3) The standard deviations and correlations of the material parameters established using the ‘standard’
580        BI formulations presented in this contribution, do not reflect the heterogeneity of the material param-
           eters. In other words, they are not representative for the standard deviations and correlations of the
           intrinsic material parameter distributions, but only for the level of uncertainty. The reason is that the
           formulations in this contribution still assume that a unique set of parameter values is the solution of
           the identification problem.

585   Acknowledgements

          Hussein Rappel, Lars A.A. Beex and Stéphane P.A. Bordas would like to acknowledge the financial
      support from the University of Luxembourg. Stéphane P.A. Bordas also thanks the European Research
      Council Starting Independent Research Grant (ERC Stg grant agreement No. 279578) entitled “Towards
      real time multiscale simulation of cutting in nonlinear materials with applications to surgical simulation and


                                                                   31
590   computer guided surgery”. Jack S. Hale is supported by the National Research Fund, Luxembourg, and
      cofunded under the Marie Curie Actions of the European Commission (FP7-COFUND Grant No. 6693582).


      Compliance with Ethical Standards

         The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


      References

595    [1] B.S. Everitt, A. Skrondal, The Cambridge dictionary of statistics, Cambridge University Press, 2010.
       [2] R.E. Walpole, R.H. Myers, S.L. Myers, K. Ye, Probability andstatistics for engineers and scientists,
           Pearson custom library, Pearson, 2013.
       [3] C. Gogu, R. Haftka, R.L. Riche, J. Molimard, A. Vautrin, Introduction to the Bayesian approach applied
           to elastic constants identification, AIAA journal 48 (5) (2010) 893–903.
600    [4] D. Higdon, H. Lee, Z. Bi, A Bayesian approach to characterizing uncertainty in inverse problems using
           coarse and fine scale information, IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 50 (2002) 388–399.
       [5] J. Wang, N. Zabaras, A Bayesian inference approach to the inverse heat conduction problem, Interna-
           tional Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 47 (17-18) (2004) 3927–3941.
       [6] P. Risholm, F. Janoos, I. Norton, A.J. Golby, W.M. Wells, Bayesian characterization of uncertainty in
605        intra-subject non-rigid registration, Medical image analysis 17 (5) (2013) 538–555.
       [7] S. Lan, T. Bui-Thanh, M. Christie, M. Girolami, Emulation of higher-order tensors in manifold Monte
           Carlo methods for Bayesian inverse problems, Journal of Computational Physics 308 (2016) 81–101.

       [8] J.L. Beck, L.S. Katafygiotis, Updating models and their uncertainties. I: Bayesian statistical framework,
           Journal of Engineering Mechanics 124 (4) (1998) 455–461.
610    [9] C.K. Oh, J.L. Beck, M. Yamada, Bayesian learning using automatic relevance determination prior with
           an application to earthquake early warning, Journal of Engineering Mechanics 134 (12) (2008) 1013–
           1020.
      [10] M.C. Kennedy, A. O’Hagan, Bayesian calibration of computer models, Journal of the Royal Statistical
           Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 63 (3) (2001) 425–464.
615   [11] J. Kaipio, E. Somersalo, Statistical and computational inverse problems, Vol. 160, Springer Science &
           Business Media, 2006.

      [12] J. Isenberg, Progressing from least squares to Bayesian estimation, in: Proceedings of the 1979 ASME
           design engineering technical conference, New York, 1979, pp. 1–11.
      [13] K.F. Alvin, Finite element model update via Bayesian estimation and minimization of dynamic residuals,
620        AIAA journal 35 (5) (1997) 879–886.

      [14] T. Marwala, S. Sibusiso, Finite element model updating using Bayesian framework and modal properties,
           Journal of Aircraft 42 (1) (2005) 275–278.
      [15] T.C. Lai, K.H. Ip, Parameter estimation of orthotropic plates by Bayesian sensitivity analysis, Com-
           posite Structures 34 (1) (1996) 29–42.

625   [16] F. Daghia, S. de Miranda, F. Ubertini, E. Viola, Estimation of elastic constants of thick laminated
           plates within a Bayesian framework, Composite Structures 80 (3) (2007) 461–473.


                                                           32
      [17] P.S. Koutsourelakis, A novel Bayesian strategy for the identification of spatially varying material prop-
           erties and model validation: An application to static elastography, International Journal for Numerical
           Methods in Engineering 91 (3) (2012) 249–268.
630   [18] C. Gogu, W. Yin, R. Haftka, P. Ifju, J. Molimard, R. Le Riche, A. Vautrin, Bayesian identification of
           elastic constants in multi-directional laminate from moiré interferometry displacement fields, Experi-
           mental Mechanics 53 (4) (2013) 635–648.
      [19] M. Muto, J.L. Beck, Bayesian updating and model class selection for hysteretic structural models using
           stochastic simulation, Journal of Vibration and Control 14 (1-2) (2008) 7–34.
635   [20] P. Liu, S.K. Au, Bayesian parameter identification of hysteretic behavior of composite walls, Probabilis-
           tic Engineering Mechanics 34 (2013) 101–109.
      [21] D.D. Fitzenz, A. Jalobeanu, S.H. Hickman, Integrating laboratory creep compaction data with numerical
           fault models: A Bayesian framework, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 112 (B8), B08410.
      [22] T. Most, Identification of the parameters of complex constitutive models: Least squares minimization
640        vs. Bayesian updating, in: D. Straub (Ed.), Reliability and optimization of structural systems, CRC
           press, 2010, pp. 119–130.
      [23] B.V. Rosić, A. Kčerová, J. Sýkora, O. Pajonk, A. Litvinenko, H.G. Matthies, Parameter identification
           in a probabilistic setting, Engineering Structures 50 (2013) 179–196, Engineering Structures: Modelling
           and Computations (special issue IASS-IACM 2012).

645   [24] W.P. Hernandez, F.C.L. Borges, D.A. Castello, N. Roitman, C. Magluta, Bayesian inference applied on
           model calibration of fractional derivative viscoelastic model, in: V. Steffen Jr, D.A. Rade, W.M. Bessa
           (Eds.), DINAME 2015-Proceedings of the XVII International symposium on dynamic problems of me-
           chanics, Natal, 2015.
      [25] H. Rappel, L.A.A. Beex, S.P.A. Bordas, Bayesian inference to identify parameters in viscoelasticity,
650        Mechanics of Time-Dependent Materials 22 (2) (2018) 221–258.
      [26] J.M. Nichols, W.A. Link, K.D. Murphy, C.C. Olson, A Bayesian approach to identifying structural
           nonlinearity using free-decay response: Application to damage detection in composites, Journal of Sound
           and Vibration 329 (15) (2010) 2995–3007.
      [27] S. Abhinav, C.S. Manohar, Bayesian parameter identification in dynamic state space models using
655        modified measurement equations, International Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics 71 (2015) 89–103.
      [28] S. Madireddy, B. Sista, K. Vemaganti, A Bayesian approach to selecting hyperelastic constitutive models
           of soft tissue, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 291 (2015) 102–122.
      [29] J.T. Oden, E.E. Prudencio, A. Hawkins-Daarud, Selection and assesment of phenomenological models
           of tumor growth, Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences 23 (7) (2013) 1309–1338.
660   [30] J. Chiachı́o, M. Chiachı́o, A. Saxena, S. Sankararaman, G. Rus, K. Goebel, Bayesian model selection
           and parameter estimation for fatigue damage progression models in composites, International Journal
           of Fatigue 70 (2015) 361–373.
      [31] I. Babuška, Z. Sawlan, M. Scavino, B. Szabó, R. Tempone, Bayesian inference and model comparison for
           metallic fatigue data, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 304 (2016) 171–196.
665   [32] S. Sarkar, D.S. Kosson, S. Mahadevan, J.C.L. Meeussen, H. van der Sloot, J.R. Arnold, K.G. Brown,
           Bayesian calibration of thermodynamic parameters for geochemical speciation modeling of cementitious
           materials, Cement and Concrete Research 42 (7) (2012) 889–902.



                                                           33
      [33] S.L. Cotter, M. Dashti, J.C. Robinson, A.M. Stuart, Bayesian inverse problems for functions and appli-
           cations to fluid mechanics, Inverse Problems 25 (11) (2009) 115008.
670   [34] J.C. Simo, T.J.R. Hughes, Computational inelasticity, Springer Science & Business Media, New York,
           2000.

      [35] T.J. Ulrych, M.D. Sacchi, A. Woodbury, A Bayes tour of inversion: A tutorial, GEOPHYSICS 66 (1)
           (2001) 55–69.
      [36] A. Gelman, J.B. Carlin, H.S. Stern, D.B. Rubin, Bayesian data analysis, Chapman & Hall/CRC Texts
675        in Statistical Science, Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2003.
      [37] J.L. Beck, S.K. Au, Bayesian updating of structural models and reliability using Markov chain Monte
           Carlo simulation, Journal of Engineering Mechanics 128 (4) (2002) 380–391.
      [38] Y.M. Marzouk, H.N. Najm, L.A. Rahn, Stochastic spectral methods for efficient Bayesian solution of
           inverse problems, Journal of Computational Physics 224 (2) (2007) 560–586.
680   [39] J. Kristensen, N. Zabaras, Bayesian uncertainty quantification in the evaluation of alloy properties with
           the cluster expansion method, Computer Physics Communications 185 (11) (2014) 2885–2892.
      [40] C. Andrieu, N. De Freitas, A. Doucet, M.I. Jordan, An introduction to MCMC for machine learning,
           Machine learning 50 (1-2) (2003) 5–43.
      [41] S. Brooks, A. Gelman, G. Jones, X.L. Meng, Handbook of Markov chain Monte Carlo, CRC press, 2011.

685   [42] S. Sinharay, Assessing convergence of the Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms: A review, ETS Research
           Report Series 2003 (1) (2003) i–52.
      [43] A. Gelman, G.O. Roberts, W.R. Gilks, Efficient Metropolis jumping rules, in: J.M. Bernardo,
           J.O. Berger, A.P. Dawid, A.F.M. Smith (Eds.), Bayesian statistics, Vol. 5 of Oxford Sci. Publ., Oxford
           University Press, New York, 1996, pp. 599–607.

690   [44] H. Haario, E. Saksman, J. Tamminen, Adaptive proposal distribution for random walk Metropolis
           algorithm, Computational Statistics 14 (3) (1999) 375–396.
      [45] J.L. Beck, Bayesian system identification based on probability logic, Structural Control and Health
           Monitoring 17 (7) (2010) 825–847.

      [46] S.J.D. Prince, Computer vision: Models learning and inference, Cambridge University Press, 2012.
695   [47] H. Rappel, L.A.A. Beex, L. Noels, S.P.A. Bordas, Identifying elastoplastic parameters with Bayes’
           theorem considering double error sources and model uncertainty, Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics.
           URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.probengmech.2018.08.004
      [48] Y. Ling, J. Mullins, S. Mahadevan, Selection of model discrepancy priors in Bayesian calibration, Journal
           of Computational Physics 276 (Supplement C) (2014) 665–680.
700   [49] C. Bishop, Pattern recognition and machine learning, Information Science and Statistics, Springer, 2006.
      [50] G.B. Arhonditsis, D. Papantou, W. Zhang, G. Perhar, E. Massos, M. Shi, Bayesian calibration of
           mechanistic aquatic biogeochemical models and benefits for environmental management, Journal of
           Marine Systems 73 (1) (2008) 8–30.
      [51] Y. Xiong, W. Chen, K.L. Tsui, D.W. Apley, A better understanding of model updating strategies
705        in validating engineering models, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 198 (15)
           (2009) 1327–1337.



                                                           34
      [52] P.D. Arendt, D.W. Apley, W. Chen, Quantification of model uncertainty: Calibration, model discrep-
           ancy, and identifiability, Journal of Mechanical Design 134 (10) (2012) 100908.
      [53] J. Brynjarsdóttir, A. O’Hagan, Learning about physical parameters: The importance of model discrep-
710        ancy, Inverse Problems 30 (11) (2014) 114007.




                                                         35
